---
title: "University of Michigan's Introduction to HTML5"
author: "bbauska"
date last editted: "12/30/2023 10+pm"
output: 
  markdown:
    with_some_style
---

<!--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-->
<!--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ readme.md of intro-html5.bauska.org ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-->
<p align="center">
  <img src="./images/images/image001.png" 
  alt="Introduction to HTML5."
  style="border: 2px solid #000000;" 
  width="50%" />
</p>

# Introduction to HTML5
###### (by Colleen van Lent, PhD - University of Michigan)

# Week 1: Learning about the Web

This week we will uncover the \"mystery\" behind the Internet. What
happens when you type a URL into your browser so that a webpage
magically appears? What is HTML5 and what happened to HTML 1 - 4? We
will also cover some practical concepts that you need to master before
you begin coding your own pages.

## Learning Objectives

-   Use a validator to evaluate their code.

-   Identify the difference between syntax and semantics.

-   Identify the parts of a syntactically correct HTML page.

-   Recognize and use common HTML5 tags.

-   Be aware of what an editor is and use one.

-   Learn about how the web works.

-   Describe how and why HTML has changed.

## Course Syllabus

Welcome to Introduction to HTML5. This course is an introduction to how
web pages are created, sent across the Internet, and viewed on your
computer, tablet, or smartphone.

This course is meant for the absolute beginner, but also touches on
information that may be new to someone who has been using HTML for some
years. In particular, the new options available in HTML5 and some
recommended policies for making sure that your page is accessible.

***HTML*** stands for HyperText Markup Language, a way of marking up
files so that browsers (Chrome, Safari, Edge, etc.) know how to display
your content as a web page. HTML uses ***tags*** to distinguish between
content (what the user should see) and the instructions for displaying
them (make this a list, make this a link to a different page, show this
picture, etc.)   There are so many things you can do with HTML. While it
is possible to make a long list of HTML tags, this approach won\'t help
you as much as practice with a smaller subset. Therefore, we focus on
the following:

-   What HTML is and how we got from the original version to HTML5,

-   The \"magic\" behind the Internet and how your web page isn\'t just
    one file, but many pieces put together by your browser using
    something called the Response/Request Cycle,

-   The syntax behind the tags - how to write good syntactic HTML,

-   The semantics behind the tags - some tags have special meaning and
    are extremely useful if you want to make your pages accessible.
    Accessible pages are ones that can be accessed by the widest range
    of people and that includes those who have  physical or cognitive
    disabilities, and

-   Getting your page on the web - This class will **not** require you
    to post your site on the Internet. However, you will learn how to
    publish your site if you choose. (And we hope you do and share your
    work with me and others in the class.)

Throughout the entire course there will be an emphasis on the importance
of good habits and examples of potential pitfalls. This course is about
learning the proper syntax of HTML5 and **styling is not covered**. You
can see an [example Web Design for Everyone
site](https://intro-webdesign.com/v3/index-html-only.html) for
reference. However, upon completion of this course you will be ready to
take the next course in this Web Design for Everybody Specialization,
Introduction to CSS3.

## **Participation Strategies**

Engaged learning looks different for everybody. In this course, we hope
you will define your own measures of success and engage with the
material in a way that best suits your needs. We recognize and celebrate
the diverse ways learners engage in courses. As you go through this
course, we hope you will reflect on your unique skills, needs, and
aspirations, and engage in the course material in a way that aligns with
your own goals. While the course provides time estimates for completion,
you should feel empowered to engage in the material in whatever ways
make sense to you.

## **Community Engagement**

We expect everyone to be mindful of what they say and its potential
impact on others. The goal is to have respectful discussions that do not
violate the community space created for these conversations. Here are
some productive ways to engage in this course: 

-   **Participate:** This is a community. Read what others have written
    and share your thoughts.

-   **Stay curious:** Learn from experts and each other by listening and
    asking questions, not making assumptions.

-   **Keep your passion positive:** When replying to a discussion forum
    post, respond with thoughts on what was said, not about the person
    who posted. Avoid using all caps, too many exclamation points, or
    aggressive language.

We expect all learners to abide by our full [Learner Engagement
Policy](https://docs.google.com/document/d/18Ucy-lT33FmkDDYdtxHEJ_nRytVLr_XGRVq2moAsPB4/edit).
We will specifically be monitoring this course for language that could
be considered inflammatory, incivil, racist, or otherwise unacceptable
for this learning space, and we will remove language deemed such.

*Note regarding "study groups" outside of the platform*: While learners
are encouraged to interact with one another using communication tools
offered within the learning platform, note that any study groups formed
outside of this platform, such as over social media or communication
applications and websites (e.g., WhatsApp) are not affiliated, endorsed,
or moderated by the University of Michigan. If you receive an invitation
to an outside study group mentioning the course and claiming to have any
official connection to U-M or individual instructors, please exercise
caution as this may be an attempted scam.

## **Assessments and Grading**

## **Weekly Quizzes**

Each week will include a graded quiz. These quizzes are intended to
reinforce your confidence in the material, not \"trick\" you. As often
as possible each question will be linked to a specific lecture or
reading. You can take the quizzes as many times as you like, but there
is a limit on how many times you can take each quiz in a certain time
period.

### **Final Project: Peer Review Assignment**

This course will culminate in the creation of an HTML document. You will
be provided with an example document and asked to style it. This will
not be a creative project, rather one that shows you can write
syntactically correct code. You can see an [example Web Design for
Everyone site](https://example-site-2.wd4e-html.repl.co/) for reference.
We will be peer grading this assignment which means that you will grade
the code created by your fellow students and they will grade yours. But
don\'t worry, we all want each other to succeed in my courses!

## **Academic Honesty**

All submitted work should be your own and academic dishonesty is not
allowed. Academic dishonesty can be defined as:

-   Copying words, ideas, or other materials from another source without
    giving credit to the original author

-   Copying answers or copying from your peers within the course

-   Employing or allowing another person to alter or revise your work,
    and then submitting the work as your own

-   Using Artificial Intelligence tools, such as ChatGPT, to create or
    edit your work and submitting that work as your own, unless you were
    instructed to use AI as part of the assignment

## **Tips for Success**

This course assumes absolutely no previous knowledge. In each module you
will be asked to do the following:

### Watch video lectures

The information has been broken down into pieces to help you learn the
material in the smallest chunks that still give you enough information
to do something with it. The goal is to give you the ability to listen
to these during any time you have. You will find that some of the videos
have material that makes sense to you at once. Sometimes you may want to
replay other videos to clarify the material. 

## Code with video lectures

Some of the videos are not traditional lectures, instead they are videos
where I demonstrate the concepts from an earlier lecture. I highly
recommend that you code along with me while you watch these videos.
*[The key to success in this course is in writing code.]{.underline}* I
put these videos in so that you have something specific to practice. It
is also a great way for you to see how often I mess up when I am
coding!!

## Change the video speed to one that works best for you

You may find that you can speed the videos up and still retain the
information. On the other hand, my mom is always telling me I talk too
quickly so you may want to slow the videos down. The important thing is
to find something that works well for you. Use the in-­video quizzes to
help you gauge how your learning is going.

## Readings & optional materials

Each week will include reading material. It is impossible to learn
everything you need to learn just by listening to the lectures. Some of
the material will come from a (free) online textbook. Other material
will be other online readings.

There will also be optional material provided in many of the weeks.
These may range from links to recent articles to videos on pioneers in
the fields of design and accessibility. None of these materials will be
required for the quizzes, but rather provide additional ways for you to
branch out and learn more about the history of the field or the emerging
ideas.

## **Course Support**

Questions and discussion of course material should take place within the
course itself. Please do not contact instructors or teaching assistants
off the platform, as responding to individual questions is virtually
impossible. We encourage you to direct your questions to the [Course
Support Discussion
Forum](https://www.coursera.org/learn/html/discussions/forums/aWM4OyvhEe6u3BIzJLH0cQ),
where your question might be answered by a fellow learner or one of our
course team members. For technical help please contact the [Coursera
Learner Help Center](https://learner.coursera.help/hc/en-us) support
forums.

## **Accessibility **

We are committed to developing accessible learning experiences for the
widest possible audience. We recognize that learners with disabilities
(including but not limited to visual impairments, hearing impairments,
cognitive disabilities, or motor disabilities) might need more specific
accessibility-related support to achieve learning goals in this course. 

Please use the [accessibility feedback
form](https://teamdynamix.umich.edu/TDClient/187/Portal/Requests/TicketRequests/NewForm?ID=3021&RequestorType=Service)
to let us know about any accessibility challenges such as urgent issues
that keep you from making progress in the course (e.g., missing or
inadequate alt-text, captioning errors). 

**Third-party sites and software:** While the University of Michigan is
not responsible for the accessibility of third-party sites or
applications that may be linked from this course, we still encourage you
to report associated third-party accessibility issues so that we can
ensure you are able to participate. In such cases, we may contact you
for additional information as we investigate ways of removing
accessibility barriers or to suggest accessible alternatives.

## **Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion**

**We welcome all learners to this course.** People like you are joining
from all over the world and we value this diversity. We strive to create
a community of mutual respect and trust, where people from all
backgrounds, identities and views are valued and heard without the
threat of bias, harassment, intimidation, or discrimination. We pay
attention to your feedback, how different types of learners experience
this course, and aim to make improvements so the course can best serve
everyone. We hope you enjoy learning about topics that are important to
you. 

## **Technology **

Below is a list of technologies that you will use to participate in this
course. I recommend that you spend time reading the brief description of
each technology before jumping into the course. By doing this, you will
have a better idea of what to expect and can create a plan for how you
will approach taking this course. 

## Coursera platform

If you are new to Coursera and you want to familiarize yourself with the
platform, read the [Help Articles in Coursera Help
Center](https://learner.coursera.help/hc/en-us/categories/201216173).
This is a good resource where you can find answers to many basic
questions such as how to adjust video settings, how to submit
assignments, and how to gain a course certificate. 

## Gamut Tools

This course uses a sharing tool called the Gamut Gallery. Throughout the
course you will be asked by your instructor to create your own work
related to the course content. The Gallery provides a digital place to
submit and share your own work, receive feedback, and pose questions to
other learners about their work. It will appear as an item titled,
"Ungraded App Item." For more information about this tool and its use in
our courses, please see the Center for Academic Innovation's [Software
Terms of Service](https://ai.umich.edu/software-tos/).

### Replit

In this course we will assume that students will use
[Replit](https://replit.com/~) to host their code. Replit is an online
Integrated Development Environment (IDE) for writing and sharing code.
Once you get the hang of using Replit you will be able to easily share
your code and your deployed website sites with your family and peers.
However, students may choose other hosting options if they prefer.

## Sublime & Visual Studio Code

If students choose not to use Replit, they will want to have an editor
to create their code.  Two common editors that you will see used in this
course and by others are [Sublime](https://www.sublimetext.com/3) and
[Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) (also called
VSCode).  Both of these programs are free to download and use and there
are also many online tutorials available to help learn the software.

## Hosting

Replit has free [hosting](https://docs.replit.com/category/hosting)
built-in -- they will often refer to it as \"sharing your repl.\"  There
are other free hosting services as well, including using [Github
Pages](https://pages.github.com/).  Learning to use Github Pages can
take some time, but is a useful skill for advanced learners.

## 1.01 Introduction to HTML5 (9:23)

![](./images/image003.png)

Hi, I\'m Colleen van Lent and I\'m happy to welcome you to Introduction
to HTML5. I am very excited to teach this course because I love the idea
that we finally will have some course that really will explain the
basics to as many people as possible. I love working with people and I
love working with technology and I think the best thing we can do is
have as many people involved as possible to really make sure that we\'re
building things that everyone can use.

In this course, we will be covering the basics. I really can\'t
emphasize enough that we will be starting at the very basic building
blocks.

![](./images/image004.png)

We\'ll start off talking about what\'s called syntax and semantics. What
is the actual code that people write in order to make a webpage a
webpage? Are there any special meanings behind any of these words that
can convey special information to those who may not be able to access
the web the same way I do? Perhaps, someone who uses special
accessibility tools.

After we cover the syntax and semantics, we\'re going to talk more about
this accessibility idea that I just alluded to. This idea that if we\'re
going to build a webpage, what do we need to do to make sure the most
people as possible can access the information?

We\'re also going to be talking about getting started in technology and
writing code. When I mean talking about getting started, I mean really
talking about getting started, right down to you and I are going to walk
through together on how we\'re going to create a file. One of the things
I think that really trips people up when they\'re starting to learn
computer science or any type of technology-based criteria, or
curriculum, is that professors or instructors say let\'s get started,
here\'s your homework. Go ahead and do it and everyone just kind of
stops because they\'re not sure where to get started. I really want to
be there for you to show you how to get started and get off on the right
foot.

![](./images/image005.png)

Let\'s talk about what we\'ll cover in this course. In Week One the
focus is on questions. It\'s not on coding, it\'s on questions. I want
you to understand what happens when you type something into the URL. If
you type in **www.introwebdesign.com**, how is this page magically
appearing in front of your browser? I also want to talk to you about
what types of tools you are going to need in order to code. We\'re going
to talk about editors and browsers and other different software tools
because I want you to know right from the start what you\'re going to
need in order to succeed in this class. Finally, we\'re really going to
talk about HTML5. What happened to HTML1? What happened to HTML2? What
is this evolution of what\'s going on with web design and the languages
we use? In Week One, again, almost no coding. Really, just giving you an
idea of how the web works and why it\'s important for you to be able to
interact with people and with code that\'s being used to create your
sites.

![](./images/image006.png)

Week Two, we\'re going to talk a little bit of theory, and then,
unfortunately for some people, a lot of code. There\'s this idea of
something called the Document Object Model, upon which all webpages are
built. If I can get you to understand just a little bit about that, then
later on, if you decide to go off and use WordPress or some other
software to make your own website, you\'re going to be able to really
understand what\'s going on so much better. We\'re going to talk about
things called contextual tags and headings and different things we can
use to make our site have different meanings and different appearances.
We\'re going to talk about links, images, lists, tables, and also
multimedia in case you would like to add any video or audio to your
site.

![](./images/image007.png)

Week Three, we\'re really going to put it all together. At this point,
you should know just enough about HTML5 where you\'ll be dangerous.
Where you can create something that works but doesn\'t work all the
time. In Week Three, we\'re going to put it together, and I\'m going to
talk to you about some of the things that are often overlooked, such as
validating your code. How can we make sure that the code that you wrote
doesn\'t just look good, it\'s syntactically correct? It\'s going to
work everywhere. Again, when we validate your code, we\'ll talk about
the syntax but we\'ll also talk about accessibility, which is hey, we
validated your code to make sure the rules are there. Let\'s also
validate and make sure that the meaning is there, as well. Finally,
we\'ll talk about what\'s called domain name registration and web
hosting because it\'s a lot more fun to make websites if you can
actually put it out there on the internet and let your friends and
family see it, as well.

![](./images/image008.png)

Finally, we\'ll work on a final project where you\'ll put together a lot
of different things that you\'ve been learning. You are going to create
what we call, syntactically valid multipage website. Your site will have
at least two to three pages. After you\'ve done your coding, you\'ll run
it through to make sure it validates and it\'s very accessible.

Your final project is actually going to be something that\'s a little
bit ugly, I\'m going to admit to right now because we\'re not going to
be talking about styling, we\'re not talking about different things. I
really just want you to understand the HTML5 language and that\'s all
about content.

![](./images/image009.png)

Let\'s talk logistics. Let\'s talk about who this class is for. Who am I
aiming for my star student? I\'m really looking forward to teaching the
complete beginner.

This class is not for those people who were building a computer down in
their basement when they were 12 years old. You are very welcome to hang
out with us but we are really here to talk about how we, through
persistence, can create a website. One of the things that I\'m kind of
anti about is the word passion. Now, I\'m passionate about teaching you
this material but I don\'t really feel like you need to be passionate
about technology or passionate about computing to really get a lot out
of this class. Instead, it\'s about persistence. I\'d like you to just
hang in there and learn enough that you can go off and help people build
better technology.

![](./images/image010.png)

A little bit about of who I am, I have a PhD in computer science which
is really the least important part of my qualifications to teach this
class. Instead, I have two decades of teaching experience and I\'ve
taught a wide range of different students. My emphasis is always been on
education and I\'m somewhat famous for running around the classroom
helping people debug their code, finding out what\'s going on here,
finding out what\'s going on there. This whole idea of teaching this
class is kind of novel to me because I am sitting here not moving. The
important part is that I really do care about people succeeding and I am
hoping that I can help you take your skills to the next level.

Here is what everyone wants to know. In this class, what kind of
workload will there be and how will you be evaluated? There are going to
be weekly videos. Some of them are like this, a lecture format. You
should really feel free to watch them anywhere but I also like to
include some videos that are going to be much more demo format. By that,
I mean you want to watch the video with a computer next to you, so you
can type along and test it out and try it.

There will be weekly readings. Most of them will be from a free online
textbook but there may be some other online articles I include as well,
if I happen to come across something that\'s very timely for what we\'ve
been learning. There will be weekly assessments, typically, in the form
of quizzes. There will be that final project and I put in here warning;
it will be ugly. I don\'t mean that the process will be ugly. I think
you\'ll find it very straightforward. It\'s just again, I can\'t
emphasize enough that this class is about the language HTML5, it\'s not
about creating beautiful sites. It\'s about you really learning just the
building blocks and it\'s always so much easier to build something ugly
the first time than build something beautiful.

How will you succeed in this class? In a perfect world, you would be
coding with two or three other people and you\'d be talking and you\'ll
never be coding alone. I\'m hoping that you\'ll create a community,
probably through the message boards. I need you to work smart. One of
the things that kills me is when people say I spent three or four hours
working on this. I never want to hear that from a student. Instead, I
feel that if you\'ve ever run into a problem when you\'re coding, you
should stop after 10, 15, 20 minutes max and go walk away. Go get help
from someone, take a break, think about something else. It\'s all about
working smart, not necessarily hard. Next, you really need to learn how
to look things up on your own. There is no way I can teach you
everything you need to know about HTML5, and you wouldn\'t want me to,
it would be very boring. Instead, you need to feel the confidence to go
out and use search engines to look up the topics that you\'re interested
in.

My job is to give you those key words and key ideas so you know what it
is you want to search for. Finally, you really need to practice,
practice, practice. You will not succeed in this course unless you\'ve
written the code yourself and really tried to muster your way through
some of the mistakes and typos that you\'re going to have. Let\'s just
review. Once again, this class is for beginners, and I\'m excited to
have you join us.

When you\'re done with this class, you will have the ability to write
and understand HTML5 code. You\'re not leaving as a developer but you
are going to leave as someone who understands code. Finally, one of the
key things that I\'m going to stress throughout this whole course, is
that you will understand the importance of accessibility in technology.
If when this course was done, I had even one student who said, hey you
know what, I\'m going to go on and I might not be a coder but I am going
to go work with somebody else to help make their code more accessible, I
would be thrilled with that. Welcome to the course and I hope you have a
lot of fun as you learn more about HTML5.

## Required Course Materials

### Textbooks

It is really difficult to find a textbook that focuses on just the
basics. In the past I used a textbook that covered too many \"extras\".
The new version of this course (and the entire specialization) will be
using two online resources.

The first resource is a big-picture tutorial from Shay Howe called
[Learn to Code HTML & CSS](https://learn.shayhowe.com/html-css/). You
can also purchase a paper copy of the book if you prefer, but everything
you need is free and online. This book isn\'t perfect - it covers more
than I would like to cover but it is a really good start. I do my best
to direct you to sections that most closely follow what I will be
covering in each video lecture.

The second resource is the [W3 Schools
tutorial](https://www.w3schools.com/html/). This tutorial is more of a
dictionary of terms where you can quickly find specific topics.

While you are reading, make sure to look closely for code. The Shay Howe
site uses CodePen - a tool that lets you see the code and the output. 
Clicking on the code will also take you to the CodePen site where you
can try changing the code to see what happens. W3Schools has a "Try It
Now" option. Many students really appreciate the ability to change
existing HTML code and see (immediately) what it does. So if you would
like the ability to write and test snippets of code, this is a good
resource. Don\'t forget that you still need to validate your code.

### Software

The **preferred** way to code in this class is editor software (Notepad,
TextWrangler, Sublime, etc). Recently I have been using [Visual Studio
Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download) and I really like it. The
software is free and works on most types of computers. If you are a paid
learner you will want to use [Replit](https://replit.com/).

# Optional Course Resources

The textbook I link to throughout the course has nice, short chapters
that go well with nice short lectures. These other (free) online
resources are just as good if not maybe even a little better in some
cases. So feel free to read them now or at the end of the class to help
reinforce what you learn over the next few weeks.

### Codecademy - *Optional and more of a long-term prospect*

If you are looking for even more hands-on practice many people use the
[Codecademy](https://www.codecademy.com/) website. This site awards
badges as you complete skills. This site is free, but ***registration is
required***. My advice is to make sure you are doing more than just
trying to \"get through,\" and focusing on the concepts that you are
practicing.

### HTML files from lectures

At the site linked below, you will find html files discussed in the
lecture videos.

-   [HTML code examples ](https://intro-webdesign.com/resources.html)

Files with all the code and other text discussed in the videos are
available in the resources section of the course. These are available in
pdf and docx format.

### Lecture Slides

To support learners, accessible lecture slides are provided as
downloadable PDF files below, and individually within each lecture
video. Please note, sometimes the slides will look slightly different
from the videos since I like to update the slides when things change.
For instance, when I first created this course Internet Explorer was a
very popular browser. It has been replaced by Edge. 

[Week 1 Lecture Slides.pdf]

[PDF File]

[Week 2 Lecture Slides.pdf]

[PDF File]

[Week 3 Lecture Slides.pdf]

[PDF File]

## Resources

### Lecture Slides

To support learners, accessible lecture slides are provided as
downloadable PDF files below, and individually within each lecture
video. Please note, sometimes the slides will look slightly different
from the videos since I like to update the slides when things change.

### 1.01-Week1-Lecture-Slides.pdf

### [Week 1 Lecture Slides.pdf]

### [PDF File]

###

## Code

Whenever possible, the code is linked through CodePen, Replit, and a
downloadable zip file.  You can choose the format that best suits your
learning style.

You can find the code at [HTML5 Course
Code](https://intro-webdesign.com/v3/html5.html#code).  It is organized
by week, so you can check to see if any code is provided for this
week\'s lessons.

## 1.02 The Evolution of HTML (9:36)

Hi. Today we\'re going to be talking about HTML5. Specifically what it
is, and why we aren\'t learning HTML1 instead. So what is HTML? HTML
stands for hypertext markup language. Markup languages are actually very
common. They\'re not the same as programing languages, instead they\'re
special languages that use tags to annotate or markup documents. In
HTML, the tags tell the browsers where you want to put headings, images,
lists, links, et cetera. A .HTML file is a special kind of file. You\'ve
already seen special file extensions before. Whenever you open a file
that has a .doc, your computer knows to open it in Microsoft Word. If
you see a file with .ppt your computer knows, oh that\'s a Power Point
file, I should open it in Power Point. In the same way, when you
computer sees the .html file, it knows that it should open it in an
internet browser such as Chrome, Firefox or Safari. Your browser can
read this file and it knows how to display it on the screen. It\'s more
than that, HTML file tags also allow screen readers and other assisted
devices to utilize the tags to present the information in new and
special ways. So HTML is very similar to English, you can understand it
even if you don\'t know much about it. Let\'s look at this example HTML
file over here. Most of it is just a typical English language. This is
an important heading or hi there. I am going to include a link to the
course page. But if you look closely, you can see we\'ve added these
little tiny tags that the browser use this to know how to represent the
material. So, h1 is just the heading tag. It says to the browser, hey
this is something really important. I want you to put it in bigger font,
and also if someone is using an assisted device, I want them to know if
this is something important. H2 also displays some sort of importance,
but not as much. I have a p tag for a paragraph, and I have another tag
down here called and anchor tag. To let the browser know, I don\'t want
you to just show this material, I want you to actually link it to a
different web page.

So here\'s the output when any browser would look at our code. In the
beginning, learning HTML is mostly about learning all those different
tags that I showed you in that file. This is called learning the syntax.
It\'s how you learn which brackets to use, backslashes, and different
things like that. You spend most of your time going, oh, did I remember
that tag and did I write it the right way? That\'s very short-lived. In
just a little amount of time, you\'re gonna gain the confidence to not
worry about your syntax and instead to be thinking about the semantics
or the meaning behind the tags. How important is this information that
I\'m trying to get across, and is this the right tag to be using? If
someone\'s searching my page, can they find what they\'re looking for?
Even if they can\'t see the text, can they use the tags to navigate
through it? So what happened to HTML1? Why are we using something called
HTML5? Well, let\'s talk about the early years. HTML was created in 1990
as a way to electronically connect different documents via hyperlinks.
Hence, this idea of a web of connections. What was happening, is that
scientists were using the Internet to list their different research
papers, and you would have a long list, each paper independent of the
other. But, HTML, gave you ways that you could read a paper, and right
within the text, link to another exciting physics paper. Because the
audience from HTML tended to be people like my dad up there in the
corner, they were nuclear physicists, they didn\'t care about things
such as color, images, or anything that wasn\'t science related, and
that was the key. HTML was intended to work across any platform. And in
order to do this you really had to avoid things such as special fonts or
different colors or anything that was more about layout than content.
However, in 1993 Mosaic emerged as the first graphical browser. And what
that means is that it was a first browser to actually introduce the idea
of images and when that happened, there was a lot of debate among the
research community as to whether or not this was a good thing. The
pioneers really wanted to keep it simple content based, let everyone
access it. But the innovators were saying no. People like pictures, they
like layout. They like that even as much as they like the content. So
there is a big battle between how the Internet should evolve from that
point. So after Mosaic emerged, the use of the Internet just absolutely
exploded, and more and more people were using it for commercial means,
instead of just for doing research. Mosaic had challengers though, in
the form of Netscape, Internet Explorer and other browsers. This was the
start of what we call the browser wars. Each of these browsers decided
that they wanted to create these proprietary tags, tags that would only
work on their browser. Some of the examples were marquee, where you
could have scrolling text, or blink which would only work on some of the
browsers and not others. Other tags weren\'t proprietary, they actually
worked on any browser, but they went against the original spirit of
HTML. They were tags such as font or center, for centering your text or
background color. This may not sound like a bad thing, but some
computers didn\'t have the access, didn\'t have the ability to have all
the different colors that other computers might have. And this led to
some really ugly looking pages. That also led to the origination of what
we call the \"best viewed on\" messages. When you went to a site you
almost immediately told which browser you should really view the site
on. Otherwise, you weren\'t going to get the optimal experience. We all
in a way suffer from browser wars, or best viewed on images today. Many
times when you go to a page, you\'ll see that you can\'t actually access
the full content if you\'re on your phone, unless you click on a link to
the full website. So how did this happen? How did we get to the point
where different browsers weren\'t agreeing on the different roles that
HTML should play? This comes back to the idea that no one runs the
Internet or the Web. However, some groups have taken a more proactive
role to try to help standardize what\'s going on out there. The first is
the Internet Engineering Task Force, they really focus on the idea of
how the different networks should collaborate and how they should work
together. The World Wide Web Consortium, instead deals with HTML and the
evolution of HTML, they want to know what kinds of tags the browsers
should and should not support. Finally, one of the newest groups, The
Web Accessibility Initiative, they want to make sure, that no matter how
people are accessing the web, they have the same ability to view the
content. We had this evolution of browsers that we\'ve been talking
about. In 1990 to \'94 it was all very simple, text-based. In \'93, we
talked about how the images entered the scene, and pretty much exploded
the Internet. Cross-browser compatibility made many of the web pages
just fall apart and led to incredibly ugly code. In the beginning of
2000 browsers went back to this idea of separating content from style.
And in 2005 it became standard practice to use HTML files, which we are
learning about in this course, to create the content and CSS files to
style it. So as the browsers evolved so did HTML. The way it tends to
work in most computer science and technology fields is that it\'s the
coders and the developers who push the standards. So as coders learned
that there more and more things that they wanted the ability to do,
it\'s the browsers job to keep up. So, where are we now? HTML5 is a
cooperation between W3C and the Web Hypertext Application Technology
Working Group, and what they\'ve done is they\'ve established these four
guidelines for how HTML5 should be approached as browsers go to support
it. The first idea is that new features should be based on HTML, CSS
which is the styling language, the DOM and JavaScript. Nothing more.
They want to reduce the need for external plug-ins, it\'s very
frustrating when you\'re on a browser and you find that you can\'t watch
the video that someone posted. They also want to move so that mark up,
or the mark up language can replace scripting. If you find that more and
more developers are writing code to make something happen, get rid of
the code and just make a simple tag that can do it instead. And finally,
HTML5 should be device independent. It shouldn\'t matter whether you\'re
on your phone, you laptop, a PC or even on a screen reader. You want
everyone the same access to the information. So when you think back over
this video, there are certain lessons I really hope stick with you. The
first is the idea that HTML is not a programing language, but rather a
way that browsers can translate documents into viewable webpages. HTML
was intended to facilitate many different content types. Images,
pictures, links, lists. Every thing along that line. What we\'ve found
throughout the history of the Internet, is that when designers want to
do something They tend to write nonstandard code to force browsers to do
it. So, this is why we\'re developing new standards in HTML5 to handle
these new requirements that people desire and push browsers to adopt the
new standards.

## 1.03 How it Works: The "Magic" of Page Requests (9:06)

Today, let\'s talk about the request-response cycle or basically what
happens when you type something into the address bar of your browser.
One of the things I think is really funny and I\'m guilty of it as well,
is that we all do things and we have no idea how they work. So, if I
were to ask you when you type in an address, what happens? So, this
lecture is actually one of the most technical of this entire class. I
don\'t want to feel like you need to memorize this or write it down, but
I do think it will help you understand a little bit more what\'s going
on as you learn HTML5. So, one of the things you might want to
understand is the client-server relationship. Servers are basically
machines that hold all the resources. Our hope is that they\'re always
connected to the network. Clients are what we\'re using, where the
machines that you use for personal use; like laptops, phones, et cetera.
Let me show you in this picture. It\'s really common to use networks
such as something called a LAN or a WAN. A LAN is a local area network,
and so what I have right here is this idea that we can have three
different computers and they\'re all sharing one server. Why would we
want to do that? Well, a lot of times, you only have one printer or one
of the different resources. This way, all three machines can work
together and share that one resource. So, the LAN is the local area
network. Sometimes, you want to have something larger or a wide area
network. So, in movies, where the good guy is breaking into the building
to steal the software, what\'s typically happened is they have this
server that everyone who works in the building can access but no one
outside the building, or you can even have it across different buildings
but you don\'t want anyone from the outside to really be able to get
your information. So, local area network is like your office building. A
wide area network might be a university, where you want to be able to
share servers across multiple buildings. The largest wide area network
is, of course, the Internet. So, now we get back to that question of
what happens when you type something into the URL? What you\'re doing is
that you the client are requesting a web page and the server needs to
respond with the appropriate files. So, when you type something in, this
is called the URL. Every URL has three parts. The protocol, how you want
to connect, the domain, which is the server, and then optionally, you
can include the document. So, even though you\'re typing in one URL, one
of the things to realize is that usually, you\'re actually requesting
lots and lots of files all at once. So, the protocols that most people
have seen; the first one is HTTP, the Hypertext Transfer Protocol. The
second one, HTTPS, is the same idea, only now we\'re having a more
secure protocol. So, if you\'re ever connecting to a bank or any place
where you\'re putting in passwords, make sure that the first thing you
see in that URL is HTTPS. If you don\'t, don\'t connect. The third one
is called the File Transfer Protocol. It\'s a little bit different. When
you see HTTP, it\'s expecting that you\'re going to give back and forth
HTML5 code; with FTP, it could be any type of file. So, we have the
protocol, now let\'s talk about what the domain names represent.
Usually, the domain names are something recognizable, such as umich.edu,
would be for University of Michigan. Google.com, wikipedia.org. So, each
of these sites has a different top-level domain. How did you get them?
How do some people get to be .edu and some .com, some .biz, et cetera?
Well, they\'re actually determined by ICAAN. Their job is to go in and
decide which types of organizations qualify for different domains. I\'ve
included a link here if you want, you can go and see what the different
types are. But the important thing to know is that your domain name is
actually mapped to an address. In the old days, like when my Dad was on
the Internet, if he wanted to connect to some place, he would actually
type in numbers; 185.261 et cetera, et cetera. Well, there\'s been a new
version of IP addresses, because every single client needs their own
address. If you think of how many people have laptops and smartphones,
we need a lot of different options. So, with these IP addresses, you
basically have sets of numbers, you have these different sets right
here, where each X can represent one of 16 different values. So, you can
see we have a lot of options, over 300 trillion, in fact. As I said,
luckily for you, the domain name server lets you type in something
really simple like Umich or Google, and it\'s the one that turns it into
that really long number. The last part of your URL is the document. So,
sometimes you want to specify a very specific document that you want to
get. So, for instance, the contact page, or in this case, another one I
have the file that\'s inside a folder. But sometimes you don\'t put a
document at all. In fact, most of the time, you don\'t. If you type in
wikipedia.org or Facebook.com, there\'s no filename. But that\'s okay.
Every server has a default document that it\'s going to return. Usually,
it\'s called index.html. All right. So, we figured it out. We know what
it means when we\'re typing something in. We understand the request.
What happens though once we type that in, is we are actually going to
get back a lot of information. Headers, cookies, form data, all the
stuff that you don\'t see. So, the important thing to know is that the
server returns files, not web pages. For a lot of us, we are very
visual. So, when we type in a URL, we\'re looking and we\'re like, \"Oh,
here\'s my page.\" But sometimes the browser might be returning
something for different types of screen readers, assistive technology,
so it\'s not returning a web page, it\'s returning lots and lots of
files. Hopefully. I will admit that sometimes the server can\'t fulfill
the request. If it can\'t, it\'ll send back an error code. I think a lot
of you are familiar with 404, where it says, \"File not found.\" That
usually means you typed something in wrong. If you get a 500 error, that
actually means that the servers down. So, you may as well go have a
snack, do something fun, come back later and type it in again. So, I
want to kind of do a live demo with you of what happens when we type
something in. So, I\'ve written it down for you. It looks up the domain,
the DNS returns an IP address, and then a whole bunch of files start to
be returned. Let\'s take a look. What I\'ve done here is I\'ve gone to
the School of Information site at the University of Michigan. I simply
typed in si.umich.edu. I didn\'t type in the protocol because it usually
just defaults. So, what you see here visually is a page. Student looking
out, looking very inspired, et cetera. But now, I\'m going to do a
little trick here, where I right-click on the screen, and I\'m going to
choose the option that says, \"Inspect.\" A window\'s going to pop up to
the side here. I\'m going to say, \"You know what? I would like to see
all the information that\'s being returned when I actually request this
page.\" I\'m requesting one page, I\'m going to hit \"Refresh.\" If you
look off to the side, don\'t worry that you can\'t see the details. But
you should see that the single page is actually made up of lots and lots
of files, and each one of these files was a separate request. Okay. So,
let\'s review. This was a kind of long video, where really all I want
you to come away from it with is the knowledge that every URL has those
three parts; the protocol, the domain, and the document. And, realize
that what you\'re creating is bigger than just one file at a time. Every
request-response cycle is usually lots and lots of rounds of
communication between the client and the server. So, we\'re going to
start off small. We\'re going to do one file at a time, but you can
always look ahead to building bigger and bigger web applications.

# Browsers

Browsers are constantly changing. Changing so much that it is difficult
to keep up with all of the changes once you pick a favorite. Myself? I
got a Mac a few years ago and have been using Chrome. But oftentimes I
switch to Firefox because it allows me to run some programs that Chrome
has trouble with. **So please remember that many times a page that looks
a certain way in one browser will look different in another.**  I highly
recommend that you check your page on two different browsers if you ever
get stuck on a site.

In the lecture video I will do my best to touch on some of the most
popular browsers. But I am including here a link to an optional reading
on [the \"best\"
browsers](https://www.techradar.com/news/the-best-web-browser). This is
an optional reading because I don\'t like the popups that accompany it.

Some people are very loyal to their browsers, any of my comments here
are just my views! I hope that we have taken some of the mystery away
from how browsers work and why there are so many.

## 1.04 Looking at Your Browser Options (5:25)

One of the things that you might notice is that there are a lot of
different options for how you can view web pages, and these different
options are called your different browsers. So different browsers have
their pros and cons. I am not one of those people who gets really
passionate about having, using one over the other. But I will tell you,
as you become a web developer, if you decide to, you\'re going to want
to know some of these differences. It\'s perfectly natural to have a
preferred browser, for most people it\'s whichever one was installed on
their computer. But, when you want to create websites, you might have
one browser you use to look at things, but you really want to test your
site on multiple browsers. So let\'s talk about some of the differences.
First, we have Internet Explorer and for a long time, it was the most
popular browser and that was just because it was the one that came with
Microsoft Windows. It was platform-dependent and what that means is that
it doesn\'t automatically work if you have a Mac. In 2015 Windows 10
came out and instead of including Internet Explorer as a default, it\'s
using something called the Microsoft Edge. Edge is meant to replace
Internet Explorer. So people who buy new computers are going to be using
Edge. But don\'t forget people don\'t buy new computers all the time or
even if they do buy a new computer, they might decide they still like
Internet Explorer better. So you basically want to make sure that
you\'re considering both browsers. Another option is Google Chrome.
Google Chrome was developed by, surprise, Google, and it was a freeware
that they created to be used on Microsoft Windows. However, it later was
ported or you can consider it changed. So it works on Linux, your Apple
machines, your Android, basically most machines that you\'re going to
come across. The nice thing about Google Chrome is that they really
focused on security. So if that's something that you're kind of
concerned about, Chrome is a good way to go. The next option is Firefox.
Once again, the theme seems to be, I'm always recommending free and open
source browsers. What open source means is that they\'ve actually shared
their code with everyone for how they created Firefox. And this is a
really great way to let people make suggestions and improvements to it.
It\'s also available for Windows, macOS, Linux, and different BSD
operating systems. So who\'s using the different browsers? Back in 2014,
I can show you that Internet Explorer had a really big chunk of the
market, right around there. You had Internet Explorer 11, Internet
Explorer 10, Internet Explorer 9 etc. So they had the biggest chunk and
then Chrome was getting a lot bigger as well as Firefox. Well, when we
look over here at 2017 though, we can see that Chrome really made a big
surge and up to 64% of desktops and laptops were using Google Chrome,
followed by Firefox, Internet Explorer etc. This is always going to
change, it\'s going to flux. You can\'t pick one browser and say hey,
this is the new one that\'s everyone is going to be using. And the other
interesting thing

to kind of think about is, especially in this old map over here, people
use really old browsers because people like to use what they\'re used
to. One thing that I\'m hoping all the students in my class take into
consideration though, is accessibility. Accessibility is basically the
ability of a browser to support all these special functionalities, and
all these new HTML5 tags, and all types of assistive technology. So one
place you can go is this site www.html5accessibility.com. And what
you\'ll find at this site is how well the different browsers are
supporting the text. So you can see right now, Edge actually has 100%
compliance which isn\'t surprising because it\'s one of the newest
browsers, so they had accesibility in mind right from the beginning. The
other browsers were created before people were paying quite as much
attention, so they are definitely making strides to get better and
better. However, it is important to notice that Internet Explorer is at
56% and since it\'s been basically relegated into the background, it\'s
unlikely that it\'s going to get much better. So what I want you to take
away from this is that browsers can really vary in how well they adhere
to different standards. And different versions of browsers also need to
be considered as well. Just because something didn\'t work in 2018,
doesn\'t mean it won\'t work in 2019. So the best thing that you can do
is write your code, and then open it up in Safari, and Firefox, and
Chrome, as many different browsers as you can. Not only will it make
your site better, but it will be a little bit interesting for you as you
can look at the different ways that HTML5 is supported.

## 1.05 Editors: How to Use an Editor to Create an HTML File (10:11)

One of the things that you\'re going to learn about making your web
pages is that once in a while, you have to bite the bullet and stop
listening to me and start creating things on your own. Until now, we\'ve
talked about browsers and how you can look at webpages but when it comes
time to create a webpage, we have to use a different type of software
called an editor. Before we begin typing in your code though, it is
always worth your time to organize yourself and organize your files. So
step 1, you need to decide where on your computer you\'re going to save
your HTML files. I highly recommend that you make your own folder alled
HTML, maybe HTML week 1, week 2, but something so that you can find your
code. Second, you need to come up with a naming convention. This is a
fancy way of saying name your file something that you\'re going to
remember. Usually in class I end up with like 18 different files that
all say page 1, page 2, page 3, and that\'s not really helpful for me
figuring out what\'s inside the page. So when you come up with your
names, it\'s usually a good idea to have two-word names such as your
Intro Page, Favorite Restaurants, Summer Pictures. When you use two
names though, you can\'t leave spaces between the names, so you\'ll
often add a dash between it or use something called camelCase, where you
use lowercase for the first word and uppercase for the second name to
have that little hump as if you\'re a camel. But again, it\'s very
important that you do not use spaces and that you\'re very consistent
with your capitalization. Computers don\'t like it when you aren\'t
consistent. The next thing you need to do is decide on an editor. If
you\'re using Windows, you might be tempted to use Notepad because it\'s
a built in editor that you can find easily. But it isn\'t really
conducive to creating webpages. So instead, I would highly recommend
Notepad++, Sublime or VS Code, also called Visual Studio Code. In the
same way, on a Mac, you can always find a software editor called
TextEdit. But it doesn\'t really have all the cool tips and tricks that
you can use to make a webpage, so instead, I would recommend
TextWrangler, Sublime, or again, VS Code. All of these editors are free,
but some of them, you might have to take that extra step to download and
put on your computer. If you\'re a paid learner on the Coursera
platform, you do have access to VS Code right here within the site. But
if you\'re one of our non-paid learners, don\'t worry, you can still do
everything we do. You just have to download it first. Once you\'ve
decided on your editor, you\'re going to open it up and then oddly,
before you do anything else, I\'m going to want you to save your file
and when you go to save it, don\'t forget to put it in a nicely named
folder so you can find it later. The next step is to add three parts to
a page. The doc type, which says, hey, I\'m going to use HTML5. The head
section of your page, which is usually where you put your title so
people can see it on the top and then any tags or content you want in
the body. Save often, every time you type in a few lines, hit that
Control-S or Command-S. It\'s a shortcut for saving your file. Then when
you\'re all done, you have your code in your editor but you want to open
up your page in your browser so you can see all the cool stuff that
you\'ve made. So let\'s try this together using Visual Studio Code. The
first thing that I\'m going to do is make a folder called \"WD4E.\" I\'m
going to right-click and click on \"New Folder\" or you can also go to
\"File,\" \"New Folder,\" and I\'m going to name it as I mentioned, just
something I\'ll remember, WD4E, and maybe add an HTML because we\'re
going to do a lot of coding together. So now I have my folder where I
want to keep my files. I\'ve opened up Visual Studio Code and don\'t be
scared off by all these different options. Focus in on the one option
that says \"New File\" and go ahead and just go, we want to use a
regular old text file. I\'m going to close this window over here and
remember I said one of the first things we want to do is we want to save
this file, so for the very first time, I welcome you to go to \"File\"
and then \"Save As.\" I\'m going to call this, myFirstPage.html. If you
notice, it has in my WD4E folder, that\'s very important. We want to
make sure it\'s in there. I\'m going to hit \'\'Save.\'\' Our next step
is very tricky and exciting and makes you feel like a real coder, even
though we haven\'t done any coding before. Because I told Visual Studio
Code that this is an HTML file, do you see up there? I am able to do
exclamation point, Tab. It fills in all this crazy HTML stuff that we
might not know how to use. The important part to notice is that I\'ve
included DOCTYPE html. There\'s a title in here. I think I\'ll change
this title to, \"My First Page.\" There\'s a body tag where I\'m just
going to say, \"Hi from Colleen.\" If I look up here near the top, I can
see there\'s a little circle next to my file name. If you see a circle,
that means I haven\'t saved it recently. I am going to do a Command-S to
save it. Now I\'ve made my first page. Yay! But I need that last step.
That last step is how do you go from looking at something as an editor
to actually seeing it in your browser. And that\'s where it\'s so
important to make sure that you remember where you saved your file. I\'m
going to open up my folder, make this a little bigger for you. I\'m
going to click on \"myFirstPage.html\". As you can see, I get the, Oh,
so exciting page that says \"Hi from Colleen.\" One of the reasons a lot
of people give up on coding early on is that there\'s actually a lot of
ways and places that things can go wrong. Let\'s always talk about that.
Let\'s jump on the message board. Let\'s learn how to go on and search
for things. But I would really like to try to prepare you to know, there
are some things that you\'re going to do and everyone does it, so it\'s
okay. The first thing that happens to many people is that when they
click on their file, instead of opening up in Chrome or Safari, or
Firefox, it opens back up in Sublime or TextEdit. It opens up in the
editor. If that happens to you, you\'re going to want to right-click on
your file and select \'\'Open With,\'\' and then you can pick up a
browser. Sometimes when you open your page, instead of seeing the
content that you are hoping, you actually see all that ugly HTML code
and you can\'t figure out why it\'s showing you that text rather than
the pretty page. If that\'s the case, usually the problem is that your
file extension, you forgot to save it as .html. You\'re going to want to
go back and check that. Another problem that can happen is you can
change your code. But even after you\'ve changed it, so that instead of
saying, \"Hi from Colleen,\" maybe you want to say, \"Hi from
Catherine,\" \"Hi from Sochi.\" You change it and nothing happens. Just
because you change your HTML file in your editor and you\'ve saved it,
you still need to go in and tell your browser, Hey, I have a new version
and that\'s called refreshing your browser. You can either go back up to
the top and hit the \"Refresh\" button, or you can try to use something
called a shortcut, which is to just type in Command or Control-R. Also,
don\'t forget to verify your file name. Sometimes we think we\'re
opening one file, but we\'re actually opening a different one. Another
problem that people often get is they get what we call like weird
characters. Things that don\'t look like English. That happens most
often when people copy and paste code from a PowerPoint or Google Slide,
instead of typing them by hand. They kind of pick up these hidden
characters. Try those things if it\'s not working for you, try
refreshing the page, try going back, and making sure you saved your
file. And if you copied and pasted, try to go back in and type it in by
hand. Throughout the rest of this course, you will see examples that I
have written in TextEdit, in Sublime, in VS Code, and something new for
the latest version of this class is something called Replit. TextEdit,
as I mentioned, is built in. Sometimes people like to use that. But it
really leads to a lot of problems that first-time coders just shouldn\'t
be bothering with. Sublime is a free option for editors where you can
download it and it\'ll give you lots of nice tips and tools very similar
to VS Code. Replit, however, is going to be something that I strongly
encourage all of you to use. Because Replit not only let you edit your
code it\'s also going to let you share your code with your friends and
family all across the country and all across the world. But wherever you
feel most comfortable, pick one, maybe two editors. And that\'s what
you\'re going to want to focus on and really become a pro.

## 1.06 Editors: How to Use VS Code (6:24)

Let\'s talk about how to use Visual Studio code. Once you open up Visual
Studio Code, it\'s not unusual to be overwhelmed at first as to what you
should be doing. Particularly since when we think of webpages, we like
to think of a web page is being one-page. But actually a web page is
numerous files that are all put together. My recommendation for you is
once you start Visual Studio Code to always click on \"File,\" \"Open
Folder,\" and navigate to the folder that you created for your site. In
this case, it\'s \"wd4e-html.\" The reason that you want to open an
entire folder, and I\'m going to say, yes, I trust the authors because
it\'s me, is because off here to the left, there is something called the
Explorer that will list all the different files you have, which right
now isn\'t that many. But when you create sites that include images or
CSS, or even a site that has three or four pages, having this outline is
going to let you link them together. Let\'s start off by making a simple
file. I\'m going to do new text file. I won\'t do anything fancy this
time. I\'m just going to do a command-S and I\'m going to call this
\"firstPage.html.\" I\'m going to add some of the code that we talked
about when we make a page which is DOCTYPE. I\'m going to stop for just
a second, and point out that Visual Studio Code has already figured out
what I\'m trying to type in. They even realize that I have a typo and
that I forgot that first initial exclamation point. I\'m going to hit
\"Tab\" and it finishes the DOCTYPE for me. I\'m going to add my HTML
tag and as I finished, it added the closing tag. I\'m going to add my
head. I\'m going to add a title. Let\'s call it, \"My Amazing First
Page.\" You know what, did you notice I\'m running out of space. Let\'s
resize this a little bit, so we can have as much room as we want. My
First Page. Then I\'m going to add a body tag, where I will again just
say, \"My first page looks great.\" On an earlier video, I mentioned the
importance of saving your work as you go along, which I\'m going to do
right now. Again, you can either use \"File,\" \"Save\" or you can do
the shortcut. But once you look at your code, it\'s really important to
make sure that you\'re always taking a moment to see what it looks like
as well. One option for doing that is to go to your folder, find your
first page and when we click on it, it opens up in Google Chrome. I\'m
going to zoom in so you can see it a little bit better. You can see I
have a title up here of, \"My Amazing First Page.\" Let\'s say I want to
go back and say, maybe my first page looks maybe not great, it just
looks okay. Because we\'re new, we have ways to improve. I\'m going to
save it. But when I go back over here, it still looks the same as it did
last time. If you remember, changing something in the editor doesn\'t
automatically tell your browser to reload it. I\'m going to click here
on the \"Reload,\" and it now it says, \"My first page looks okay.\"
Personally, when I code, I like to have half my screen as the browser,
and half my screen as text editor, so I can go back and forth and see
both. I\'m also going to go in

here and add one more. \"I am adding another line.\" I\'m going to do
\"Save,\" and I\'m going to do \"Reload.\" One of the things you might
notice is how things look in the editor is not always how it\'s going to
look on the webpage, will learn how to fix that. But I want to show you
one more tip just in case you feel like Visual Studio Code is the editor
you want to use. I\'m going to click back on Visual Studio Code. I\'m
going to go the left-hand side, make a little bit smaller and go down to
where I can find something called \"Extensions.\" If you go to
\"Extensions,\" you will find something called \"Live server.\" That
right there, \"Live server\" by Ritwick Dey, install it. You can feel
pretty good when you see something has 33.9 million downloads. I\'m
going to install it. I only have to do this once. That\'s it. I never
have to do this again. As it installs, let me explain what Live Server
does. Live server will let you see the changes you make as you type.
I\'m going to close this up here. I\'m going to make sure that I can see
both things on the same page. Now that I have Live server, I\'m going to
go down here to the bottom of the screen where it says \"go live\" at
the very bottom. Now, every time I make a change, let\'s go back and
say, \"My page looks,\" we\'ll go back to, \"amazing.\" Watch carefully,
I\'m about to hit Save. As I hit Save, it automatically showed on the
other page. I could change my, um, I\'m going to just to give you a
sense, because Visual Studio Code is pretty cool. I\'m going to type in
just a little bit of Latin and when I do, it fills it all in for me. So,
when you use Visual Studio Code, the most important thing is to open it
up and use proper naming conventions. If you would like, you can install
\"Live Server\" and then from there we will go and learn how to add
multiple files, multiple images, and lots of things that is going to
make your webpage look amazing.

### Editors: How to use VS Code

We highly recommend using [Replit](https://replit.com/) but Visual
Studio Code (VSCode) is a popular editor that you may want to use as
well -- especially if you need to code without access to the Internet.  

Some of the reasons people use VSCode are:

1.  It's free

2.  It works on all of the major operations systems (Linux, Mac, and
    Windows)

3.  It color-codes your file for easier debugging

4.  It provides hover-over definitions, tips, and suggestions for any
    language.

5.  It provides numerous tools such as auto-complete and the ability to
    view changes to your HTML page in real time.

6.  For advanced users you can link it to your Github site for sharing
    with others.

If you want to use VSCode you will probably need to download it to your
computer. Here is a trusted link: [Download Visual Studio Code - Mac,
Linux, Windows](https://code.visualstudio.com/download)

Once you have the software installed you can watch the [Getting started
with Visual Studio
Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/introvideos/basics).  Don't
worry that they start with Python and JavaScript, they get to an HTML
example about 5 minutes into the video!   Make sure to focus on the
parts of the video where you can open files, and the portion where they
show you how to use Live Preview.

One of the most powerful tools in VSCode is IntelliSense -- a feature
that fills in code for you.  For introductory students it can get
confusing if VSCode fills in the code that you were expecting.  So I
encourage you to validate all of your code with the [The W3C Markup
Validation Service](https://validator.w3.org/) to ensure that you are
writing syntactically correct code.

## 1.07 Editors: How to use Replit (5:55)

Earlier I mentioned that one of the editors I would highly recommend you
use in this course is called \"Replit,\" because I want to show you that
writing code is great. Writing code that you can share online to show
others your progress is also really exciting. You\'ve probably used
online editors before. Google Docs and Microsoft 365 are common ways to
share your documents. You can type something in, you can share it with
your friends or your colleagues, and you can all make updates. Sharing
code is a little bit different, especially when you want to share your
web page with someone. Do you want to share the code or do you want to
share more with them that visual thing that you created? Today, we are
going to use something called \"Replit.\" Replit is what we call an IDE,
which is a fancy term called Integrated Development Environment. It lets
you write your code, run your code, test your code, and share your code
with others. Replit is an IDE that was made for beginner programmers. It
doesn\'t mean that the first time you see it, you\'re going to be able
to use it immediately but it does mean that it is built for people like
you and I who want to make simple web pages and learn as we go along. In
this class, I will switch between using Replit and Sublime and Visual
Studio Code. However, when you submit your homework, I\'m going to
highly recommend you using Replit because as I mentioned, unlike Sublime
and Visual Studio Code, there are built-in tools for you to share your
web page. The first step to using Replit is to create a Replit account.
You\'re going to want to create a username, provide your email and give
them a password. But wait, wait wait wait, just one moment before you
create that username, I want you to realize that the username you pick
right now is going to be part of that URL for your web page. So pick
something that\'s fun, representative view, or if you\'re hoping to make
a site perhaps for family members, friends, a company, pick a name that
you think that they would want to use as a front-facing part of their
company or personality. Once you\'re logged on, we\'re going to start
off by creating a Repl. I\'m going to click right down here on \"Create
Repl\". It\'ll give you a number of different templates that you can
use. We will scroll down until we find HTML, CSS, and JS, which stands
for JavaScript. Don\'t worry that we don\'t know any CSS or JS yet. We
can go ahead and click on here. The next step is to give our site a
title. I\'m probably not going to use AnguishedConcreteShockwave as
they\'re recommending. Instead, I\'m going to go ahead and use
\"MyFirstPage.\" As a reminder, I\'m doing that \"MyFirstPage,\" in
fact, I\'m going to do it the right way and make \"my\" lower case, the
F capitalized, and the P capitalized. That\'s what we call camelCase.
Anyone can see it, and I\'m going to click on \"Create Repl\". The first
few times you log on, you\'re probably going to see a lot of helpful
tips. I would recommend that you click through on all the next. However,
for me, I\'ve seen this before, so I don\'t really need to go through
it. If you look, you will see that Repl has provided a lot of
scaffolding for us, right? It\'s gone in and it\'s given us a lot of
code. It\'s provided that DOCTYPE HTML. It has a title for us, it\'s
called \"Replit\" so I might change that to again, \"My First Page\" or
something on that line. It\'s linked to something called a style sheet
that we\'re not using yet so I\'m going to go ahead and just delete
that. Let\'s not get ahead of ourselves. It has \"Hello world\" and then
it has a whole bunch of JavaScript. I\'m just going to get rid of that
too. There\'s no point overwhelming ourselves with code we don\'t need
but I am going to say instead of \"Hello world,\" I\'m going to type in
\"Hello Colleen\" and I\'m going to do a command-S for save. Did you
notice something off here to the right? It will automatically show us
what our page is going to look like as we type and save things. I could
change this from \"Hello Colleen\" to \"Hello Bacon\" as you will all
get to know, it\'s my very cute dog. \"How are you today?\" I\'m going
to hit \"Save\" again. Again for save, I\'m going to do a command S.
This is a really great part about being able to write my code, test my
code, and see my code. I want you to look and take the time to really
check out Repl and see that you can see like, oh, I even have a real web
page here. My web page is https://myfirstpage.wd4ehtml.repl.co. Notice
that it deleted my CamelCase. It made it all lower case. The reason for
that is because when you\'re typing in a URL, what\'s the chance that
someone\'s actually going to remember to make some of them upper case
and some of them lower case? You\'ll create files, you\'ll edit your
files. While you edit them, you\'ll be able to see what they look like.
This is why I\'m recommending you use Replit.

# Editors: How to use Replit

Replit is what we call an Integrated Development Environment -- this is
a fancy term software that lets you do more than just edit your
files. In this case Replit lets you create a page AND host it so that
other people can see what you have created.

Replit is free, and the first step is to make an account.

## Getting started

1.  Go to <https://replit.com/>

2.  Select sign up

3.  Create a username, provide an email, and create a password

4.  At any time if you are asked to answer the optional questions
    (programming ability, light/dark mode, usage) you can skip them

5.  Go to the email inbox you created your account with and verify your
    email

![The Create a Replit account screen.](./images/image011.png)

## Creating a repl

![The + Create button under the heading My Repls.](./images/image012.png)

1.  If you search the page you should find a heading titled: My Repls.
    Under that is a blue box with the words + Create. Select \[+
    Create\]

2.  A new screen will open and you will need to fill in some
    information:

    a.  Your template: set it template to \[HTML, CSS, JS\]

    b.  Add a title for your project

    c.  If you want to keep the project public: Yes

3.  Click \[+ Create Repl\]

![Information to fill in on the create a repl screen: template, title, and public.](./images/image013.png)

## Congrats!

A tutorial will pop up and I encourage you to look through it to find
out what the different parts of the IDE are. But for now the important
thing is that you should be able to find three things: the Files
section, the Coding Environment, and the View window.

![The files section](./images/image014.png)

## File Section

The file section is located on the top left corner of the screen. This
is where you can:

-   View all your files and file structure

-   Create new files by selecting the new file button in the upper right
    side of the file section. Name this new file and remember to use the
    correct file extension (.html, .css, .js) -- Replit will create a
    template based on this extension.

-   Create new folders by selecting the new folder button and naming
    your new folder

## Coding Environment

The coding environment is located in the middle of the screen and is
where you can edit your code. 

![A code editor](./images/image015.png)

## View Window

As you make changes you can click the run button and Replit will display
your index.html file in the Webview area on the right hand side of the
screen. This is also where you can find the URL to share your site - it
will be a combination of your username and the project name you chose
when you created your repl.

This is also where you can find the URL to share your site - it will be
a combination of your username and the project name you chose when you
created your repl.

![The view window](./images/image016.png)

## More information

You can always go to the [official Replit
site](https://docs.replit.com/getting-started/intro-replit) for more
detailed information on items such as:

-   Instructions on "how would you like to use Repel"

-   For education, for work, or for personal use

-   How can I save my file and add a new one? 

### Additional Resources

Here are some optional resources for you to explore if you are
interested in learning more about the topics from this week.

### The origins of MOSAIC

[Interview with Joseph
Hardin.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-c8iWUh3Sv4&app=desktop) If you
are interested in learning more about the people who developed Mosaic,
here is an interview with Joseph Hardin. The material in this video is
just meant as a supplemental resource and is not required for the
quizzes or any other evaluation.

### Resources

### Readings

The readings come from [Learn to Code HTML & CSS: Develop & Style
Websites](https://learn.shayhowe.com/html-css/) and the [W3Schools
tutorials](https://www.w3schools.com/html).

Some students prefer to do the readings before the lecture videos - they
find it easier to listen when they recognize some of the words I am
using. Some students prefer to do the readings after the lectures so
that as they read they can connect it with what I said. Personally, I
would suggest that you do the readings before **AND** after the
lectures.

But no matter which method you chose, **make sure you do the readings
before the quiz**. They go into more detail than my lectures and many of
the quiz questions come directly from the readings. Also, make sure not
to read the entire lessons for 8. They go into CSS which we are not
covering in this course. (CSS is the next course in this series.)

-   [Lesson 2: Getting to Know HTML
     ](https://learn.shayhowe.com/html-css/getting-to-know-html/)

-   [HTML Links](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html_links.asp)

-   [HTML Lists](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html_lists.asp)

-   [HTML Images](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html_images.asp) 

## Lecture Slides

To support learners, accessible lecture slides are provided as
downloadable PDF files below, and individually within each lecture
video. Please note, sometimes the slides will look slightly different
from the videos since I like to update the slides when things change.

[Week 2 Lecture Slides.pdf]

[PDF File]

## Code

Whenever possible, the code is linked through CodePen, Replit, and a
downloadable zip file.  You can choose the format that best suits your
learning style.

You can find the code at [HTML5 Course
Code](https://intro-webdesign.com/v3/html5.html#code).  It is organized
by week, so you can check to see if any code is provided for this
week\'s lessons.

## 2.01. The Document Object Model (DOM) (9:58)

Let\'s talk about writing clean code. When I\'m talking about clean code
I\'m talking about learning how to write code that\'s going to work on
as many devices as possible. In order to do that, you need to know a
little bit about the Document Object Model, also called the DOM. When
HTML5 was developed the main kind of driving goal is that they want to
stick by the standard. That any new features should be based on HTML,
CSS, the DOM, and JavaScript, and you can have a chance to learn about
each one of those. But I want to talk about the DOM for just a little
bit because it\'s going to help you understand the HTML a little bit
better. One of the things about geeky computer scientists like myself is
that we love trees. Not like trees out outside that are green and
beautiful in the fall. We like mathematical trees. These tree-like
structures that we can prove to be valid or invalid. So, when we talk
about HTML as a tree we\'re talking about this idea that at the very
root of the tree we are going to be creating HTML. Then, from that tree
when we say, \"I\'m going to make an HTML document.\" We want two parts.
We want the head over here, and we want the body. In the head we\'re
going to keep all that kind of information that the user isn\'t going to
see for the most part. The one difference is we might talk about the
title, but we\'re going to have all of that kind of hidden stuff nobody
really cares about. In the body is where we\'re going to learn to put
all of our HTML5 tags. So let\'s talk about HTML as a tree. In this case
I\'m showing you this idea that at the root of every HTML page should be
what\'s called the HTML tag. That kind of thing that says, lets the
browser know, I\'m going to be giving you certain types of tags and
here\'s how I want them to work. If we don\'t look at it as a picture, I
can also kind of just tell you that every tree has three parts to a
well-formed document. The Doctype, which is the version of HTML that
you\'re going to be using. The head, which is all of the metadata or
kind of extra information, and the body. The body is the displayable
content. The thing that most people are going to get back when they do
the request-response cycle. So let\'s talk doctype. You are so lucky.
When I was creating web pages at first and we were in HTML4, we had to
come up with all these different ways to kind of explain whether our
HTML4 was like very strict standards or whether it was transitional. In
HTML5, it\'s very simple to say, \"Nope, there\'s only one thing and
it\'s called DOCTYPE HTML, and you\'re all set.\" For the head which is
inside the head tag, we\'re going to have all this additional
information used by the browser. So for instance you might want to say
what language you\'re creating your page in. You could also include, and
you really want to include, what the title of your pages. When I am
talking about the title I\'m not talking about big kind of header that
you see. I\'m talking about the little tiny thing you see in the tab of
your browser. Later, you might want to add supporting files as well. You
might want to have CSS files that will style your page, or JavaScript
that can add on different interaction, or really any type of add-on
that\'s going to change the way people view and interact with your site.
Other than the title, the metadata is not displayed, people will not see
it. What people do see is the information that\'s in your body tag. That
body tag is the bulk of your page. So it\'s very important to write well
formatted or tree-like code where you\'re making sure that every tag has
an end. That you\'re not putting tags in weird orders. So, most of the
content in the body is displayed by the browser but every once in a
while there\'s a little bit of metadata in there too. But we\'re not
going to hit that in this class. So let\'s look at an example. Right
here, I have a file called \"template.html,\" and I\'m displaying the
code here on the screen for you. Can you find the three parts of a
well-formed document? The first thing you want to look for is the
Doctype. We\'ve got that right here. Letting you know that this is an
HTML5 document. We then have the HTML tag which was the root of our
really scientific tree, and I\'m letting people know I\'d liked the
language that it\'s displayed in to be English. In the head section
we\'ve got that metadata. Where it\'s telling us things like, \"Hey, I
know that there\'s lots of different keyboards and ways across the world
to represent letters. I want you to use what\'s called UTF-8.\" Don\'t
worry that just use it every time. Then the next part of my metadata is
the title where we want to see it saying, \"My First Page.\" That\'s it.
That\'s two of the three parts. The last part is the body tag and it\'s
displaying the content that we want to see on the screen. So let\'s look
at this in a browser. What do I have? I have my title way up here, and
my displayable content right down there. I have written the code, the
next step you should always do is validate the code. Say, \"Ok, I have
written code it looks good, but I know that browsers are very nice and
they make things display nicely even when I haven\'t written good
code.\" So if you go to validator.w3.org, you can check any website to
see if the code is valid and you have three choices. You can upload the
URL, you can upload a file, or you can actually copy and paste your code
and put it right in there. In this case, I\'ve put in the URL to
template.html. Run Check, and yay, not surprisingly because I knew I was
going to be taping this, it successfully checked. Don\'t worry about
warnings. Warnings are usually in to cover themselves. What if you want
to validate your file but your files aren\'t actually on the Internet
yet? Let\'s walk through really quickly an example of how you can do
that. Let\'s say that I have my file \"template.html\" and I want to
check it. I want to point out to you that I went in and I changed the
file and I put in an intentional typo. I spelled the closing tag for
title incorrectly. So let\'s see what happens. And if the browser or the
validator can find this. What I\'m going to do is I went to
validator.w3.org, and I\'m now going to select the third option,
\"validate by direct input.\" I go back to my file, command A or control
A, if you\'re on a PC, Command C, I copied all the code and now I want
to put it in the validator. Hit \"check,\" up, and if we scroll down
here I can make this a lot bigger for you. You can see that I did get
two errors. Uh oh. Why did I get two errors when I only typed one error
in? Well, validators are never perfect. So what error it found is it
said, \"Uh oh. I found the end of a file and I was not expecting that.\"
Well the reason that happened is let\'s check out error number 2, it
tells us, \"Oh you forgot to close the title tag.\" So sometimes one
error can cause a lot of error messages. So don\'t worry. I\'ve seen as
many as 50 or 60 errors that once I corrected one line of code it fixed
more than 80 percent of those errors. So I\'m going to go back over to
my code, I\'m going to fix it and put that title in and save it. Copy it
again, put it in and I\'m going to check again. This time, checking
complete, no errors. So just to review, you really want to follow DOM
structure if you want a well-formed page. Following that structure means
you always use beginning and end tags. Also, you close inner tags before
outer ones. What that means is if you start a title tag you\'ve got to
end it before you end the body tag. You also will want to use valid
attributes which is one of the things we\'re going to talk about a
little later when we talk about images and basically parts of your page
that need extra information. The problem with browsers is that they\'ll
actually fix bad code for you. I always call them the helicopter parents
of coding. It\'s like, \"Oh, I know what you wanted it to look like so,
that\'s the way I\'m going to make it look on the screen.\" The problem
is that doesn\'t always work for everyone. So, just because your site
looks good to you when you\'re looking at it on your browser, doesn\'t
mean it\'s right. You have to use a validator to check your code.

# HTML5 Tags and Syntax

At first it will seem like the number of tags is overwhelming, but you
can really start by focusing on the most common. These tags include:

-   head (head) 

-   body (body)

-   headings (h1 through h6)

-   paragraph

-   links

-   images

Complete the following reading to make sure that you recognize these
tags. It will also tell you more about the handy option to View HTML
code when you visit pages.

[HTML Basic Examples](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html_basic.asp)

[HTML
Headings](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html_headings.asp#:~:text=It%20is%20important%20to%20use,make%20text%20BIG%20or%20bold.)
(optional, but recommended)

## 2.02. HTML5 Tags and Syntax (12:10)

This is it. Today\'s the day, I\'m finally going to teach you enough
HTML that you can start making an interesting page to share with your
friends and family. It\'s also, unfortunately, probably, or at least
hopefully, my first really big disappointment to you. And the reason is,
I need to just break it to you right away that I can\'t teach you all of
the HTML5 tags. I can\'t teach them all to you and you don\'t want me to
teach you all the tags. It would be incredibly boring for me to list
them all off to you. Instead, I\'m gonna get you started and point you
in the direction of where you can find resources for more tags. Because
it\'s really not until you need a tag that you ever really bother
learning about it. Every tag has a beginning and an end. So, right here
I\'m using what\'s called an h1 tag or a heading tag to encase the words
\"Hello World.\" The first h1 is my start tag. It just shows the simple
tag that I want inside brackets. The second tag, the closing tag, always
starts with a slash. The indicates to the browser, she\'s about to end a
tag. This is one of the most common, is to have the start tag and the
closing tag, with some sort of text inside of it. My next tag, or the
image tag, is what\'s called a self-closing tag. There\'s only one tag,
and it contains both the beginning and the end. In this case, as soon as
the browser sees the image tag, it knows that you\'re gonna give it
information that it can use to create a picture. And since there\'s no
real text associated with the image, at least at this point, or any that
you want to show on this screen, it\'s going to close itself. So, while
every tag has a beginning and an end, some do close differently. Also,
some tags have what we call attributes. So the source which is where the
picture is located, an href which is where the new page you want to go
to is. So when we talk about the tags, for some of them I\'ll also be
talking about the attributes. Before we begin, I want to talk to you
about one of the most important attributes in an element and that\'s its
display. The two most common display types are what are called block and
inline. Block tags are ones that take up a certain amount of width and
height. So anytime you have a tag that\'s called block, it\'s the same
thing as if when you were typing, you hit new line at the end, or enter,
or return. Inline tags are ones that only take up as much space as is
needed. I\'m gonna show you examples of both, but I really want you to
understand some tags are block and some are inline. And it may not seem
important now, but it\'s the kind of thing that\'s going to make it much
easier for you when you\'re trying to make your pages look a certain
way. So some of the most common tags, include the ones I\'m about to
tell you about. Headings are block tags. You have h1, h2, h3, all the
way down to h6. These tags have what are both called syntax and
semantics. To the browser, at first sight, it might simply mean, \"hey,
everything that\'s in an h1 tag, I want to make it really big and
bold.\" And things that are h6, \"I also wanna make them slightly bigger
and bolder, but not nearly big and bold as the ones of the lower
numbers.\" What a lot of people do is they just kind of randomly throw
around h3 tags or h4 tags just because they like the look that the text
takes on it. But these tags also have semantics, kind of a meaning that
you don\'t see when you just look at it, and the semantics are, things
that are in an h1 tag have much higher importance than things that are
in an h5 or h6. And this is very important for people who are using
screen readers. If you start throwing h3 tags and h2 tags all over the
place just because you want them to be a little bit bigger and bolder,
it\'s gonna be very confusing. Another extremely common tag is the
paragraph tag. It\'s also block, and inside of it you can only contain
other inline elements. So you can put a lot of text, a lot of pictures
and things like that, but you should never put a paragraph inside of a
paragraph or even, you should never put a heading inside of a paragraph.
Another common tag is the div tag. This is a generic section that tends
to be larger than a paragraph, and it\'s related content that you would
like to group together. Divs used to be the most popular tag. You would
use the div for everything. The problem with divs is that there\'s
really no semantic meaning behind a div. If you put a lot of them to
your page you\'re not giving your readers or users any extra information
to let them know that this is a footer or a header or something along
those lines. Two additional tags that you\'ll find you\'ll use a lot are
the list tags. If you put in the tag &lt;ol&gt; that stands for an
ordered list. By default it\'s going to put each list item as one, two,
three, etc. You need to make sure that you end each of your list items
before you start the next one. And you need to make sure that you\'ve
ended all your list items before you end your ordered list. The
unordered list is very similar, only instead of using numbers, you\'ll
use special symbols, perhaps the circle, or the small square, depending
upon your browser. Now, later when we talk about attributes, I\'ll
mention that you can go ahead and change your ordered list. So instead
of being regular numbers, you\'re using Roman numerals, or uppercase
letters, or lowercase letters. But by default, these are just going to
either be a one, two, three, four, etc., or some sort of little disc.
Finally one more tag that I know you\'re gonna see a lot of is the line
break tag. Line break is simply a &lt;br&gt;, stands for line break, and
this is a self-closing tag. Now one of the things that\'s very important
that I tell you is when you\'re typing your code you can put as many
line breaks in your code as you want. Enter, enter, enter, enter, enter.
But the browser ignores all of it. The browser is not going to put
something on a new line, unless it runs out of space or it specifically
sees the &lt;br&gt; tag. So I mentioned before with the lists that tags
can have attributes. Attributes provide additional information about an
element. Sometimes they\'re absolutely necessary, sometimes they\'re
just supplemental. The important thing to remember is that attributes
are always, always specified in the start tag, in the beginning, and
attributes come in a name value pair. So let\'s go ahead and look at a
tag that needs attributes in order to work. I\'m gonna use the image tag
as an example. Images are inline which means you can actually put many
images next to each other. And in order for an image tag to work, you
pretty much need to tell the computer what picture it is you want it to
show. So in this case, the source attribute that indicates the browser
that the picture you wanna show is called \"myPicture.jpg.\" Always
notice that again it\'s a name value pair. So the name of the attribute
it sorts and the value always goes in double quotes, and in this case is
\"myPicture.jpg.\" Many people will just end right there, but I don\'t
want you to do that. Images should also always include an alt attribute.
Alt stands for alternative text, and this is what\'s going to show up to
somebody who\'s using a screen reader, or even if the picture is missing
for some reason, because you\'ve misnamed your file. This will allow, if
you have the little broken picture, some sort of text to show up, to
help people realize what it is you\'re trying to show. So in this case,
I have one tag, which you can tell because of the bracket, and two
attributes, source and alt. Now peaking of images there\'s a few things
I want to mention to you. Images rarely work the first time you use
them. They\'re either gonna show a broken link because you wrote the
wrong file name or you forgot to upload it or it\'s not in the right
file, or the picture is going to be too big or too small or something
like that. Unless you have the broken link, and you\'re just worried
about the appearance, I want you to just let it go for right now. What
we care about right now is that you can get tags to work. We\'re gonna
worry about appearance later. So if you really have your heart set on
making things look a certain way, then make sure that you open up the
picture in some sort of editor and save it to exactly the size you want.
And give it a really good name. It\'s very frustrating to work on your
web

page when all of your files are named \"image_02586.\" Here\'s an
example for you of one image tag with multiple attributes. I have the
image tag, followed by source, \"logo.jpg.\" I have the alternative
text, which is info for the screen readers and broken links. I include a
title attribute, which will often display when you hover over the image,
and then I also have a class attribute, which might indicate extra
formatting, such as the height, the width, the position, etc. As you
learn more and more tags, you\'re gonna learn that they have specific
attributes. It makes no sense for an image to also include some sort of
href. It makes no sense for a link to include other attributes. But
there are some that apply to many of the tags, so I just want to mention
them to you quickly and we\'ll come back to them later in the class. The
first is, well, the class attribute. What is does is it applies special
properties to groups of elements. We\'ll use that later when we want to
say, \"hey, we want to style all these pictures perhaps as thumbnails.\"
Ids specify a very unique id to just a single element on the page. And
you\'re gonna want to do this if you want to link back to it, if later
you wanna apply JavaScript to it. But ID says, \"hey this is a special
part of the page, you\'re not gonna find anything else like it.\" Style
is an attribute that used to be very widely used. Style lets you apply
visual style. So you can put in special colors or spacing and things
like that. The next one is called accesskey, and an accesskey is very
important for accessibility. It allows a shortcut key to kind of
activate, or put into focus, an element. So, maybe you have a big page
and you have a form or something on it, and you want someone to be able
to quickly get to a certain part of your page. You can give them an
accesskey. In the same way, some people may be accessing your page and
only using the tab button to navigate through your page. If you do that,
you\'re gonna wanna be careful about putting what\'s called a tabindex,
and it lets you actually specify which order people get to different
elements in your page. So even though something may come later in the
page, if you feel it\'s really important you can put a high tabindex and
them get there quickly. Okay, so one of the things I told you is that
all tags start with a bracket. Which is fine, that\'s very easy to
figure out, and the browser knows whenever it sees a bracket, it
shouldn\'t display the content, it should do something fancy. So what do
you do if you want the browser to display a bracket? And say, \"hey,
this isn\'t a start tag?\" Well, then you\'re gonna use special
entities. So if you want a bracket, then use \"&lt;\". The lt stands for
less than and please note that\'s an L, not a one. You could also do
\"&gt;\" for greater than, \"&copy;\". If you\'d like extra blank
spaces, you actually have to use a special entity. Putting space, space,
space, the browser ignores it. You\'d have to actually put \"&nbsp\".
Again, if you want the cent, all right, well what if you actually want
an ampersand? Well, in that case we even have a special entity for that,
which is \"&amp;\". So, we\'ve gone through a number of tags today, and
you\'re gonna learn more and more tags and probably use cheat sheets and
go online to find a bunch of different tags you wanna use. So an
important this that I want you to know is, how do you know the
difference between a tag and an attribute? And the key is to look for
those brackets. Also you\'re gonna want to make sure that you know which
two symbols end a self-closing tag. All right. Don\'t forget, that\'s
where you have the forward slash in the closing bracket. These are the
kind of things that can really mess up your code when you try to
validate it later, and so being cognizant of these ideas in the
beginning will really help you write much cleaner code.

# Cheatsheets

There are many online \"cheat sheets\" for HTML. These files list all of
the HTML5 tags, and also include information about tags that are common,
but no longer supported by HTML. There are many cheat sheets available,
but here are links to three that I have recommended in the past.

1.  WPKube has prepared an extensive, up-to-date, ultimate cheat sheet
    on HTML 5--- it includes all the tags listed in alphabetical order.
    We also included the availability of the tag from the previous HTML
    4 version for comparison. You can find it at: [The Ultimate HTML5
    Cheat
    Sheet](https://www.wpkube.com/html5-cheat-sheet/)[.]{.underline}

2.  This next cheat sheet also provides information on tags, but has a
    built-in editor to try things out. It also includes information on
    how to add some of your favorite emojis!  You can find it at: [HTML
    Cheat Sheet](https://htmlcheatsheet.com/)

3.  The third cheat sheet comes from Webaim.  It not only covers the
    tags, but helps to explain the semantics and function of each tag
    and what accessibility considerations you might want to think about
    when using it. You can find it at:  [WebAIM: HTML Semantics and
    Accessibility Cheat
    Sheet](https://webaim.org/resources/htmlcheatsheet/)

# Semantic Tags

One of the best ways to make sure that your page is accessible to as
many people as possible is to use semantic tags. When writing HTML, it
is easy to get carried away adding \<div\> elements. While your page
will still work, it can make your code hard to read and hard to change.

We need to do our best to keep our code "clean" -- this means using the
HTML5 structural elements where suitable. A quick refresher on semantic
tags can be found on the W3Schools site [HTML Semantic
Elements](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html5_semantic_elements.asp).

## 2.03. Semantic Tags (6:04)

Hi everybody. Today we\'re gonna be talking about some of the newer
HTML5 tags that I like to refer to as the semantic tags. This is going
to continue our conversation about how we\'re trying to make our
webpages the most accessible as possible to as many people. Before we
begin talking about specific tags, though, I want to talk to you about
the design of your webpage. Really, the most important step in your web
design is the design. Once you\'re down pat with the different tags and
typing in files, we\'re gonna change our focus to how you want to lay
out your page. And you need a really clear picture of what you want to
create before you can begin coding in earnest. So let\'s take a look at
this sample page. Again, it\'s just a quick sketch, and it shows that I
would like to have a header section, a footer section, and a few other
sections embedded in between the two of them. Once I know that that\'s
the kind of design I want, I can begin coding. So you may recall that
one of the most common tags used to be the &lt;div&gt; tag, because in
the beginning, kind of dum, dum, dum, you did everything with
&lt;div&gt;. You would go through your page, group it together, and put
each group into a &lt;div&gt; tag. These divs almost always had some
sort of special class or id associated with them. So for instance, one
div might have the class of header, another the section, another the
footer. This way, you could back to your design and really break it up
in a way that worked best for you. The first tag that I\'ll be talking
to you about today is the header tag. The header tag is typically used
to group together introductory or navigational aids. So you\'d put in
your title, perhaps your navigation bar, anything that really lets the
user know right off the bat what this page is about. The thing I want
you to understand about the header tag is that it is a block tag, and
nothing more than that. There\'s no special formatting or anything along
that line. However, it does let the user know that this is the header
section. Now, most people will never see the tags. Remember, the browser
looks at the tag and doesn\'t display it, instead formats its content.
But for people who are using screen readers or other assistive devices,
this is a great way for them to find what they\'re looking for if
they\'re not using visual clues. Another point I wanna make is that the
header tag should not be confused with the head or different heading
tags. This is going to happen to you a lot. Just remember that the
&lt;head&gt; tag is for metadata, and the &lt;header&gt; tag is more of
just an aid. The next tag I\'m gonna talk to you about today is the
&lt;nav&gt; tag. The nav is basically a section of your page that links
to other pages or parts within your page. So, inside your nav you\'re
not going to have links to Facebook, or Google, or your LinkedIn account
or anything like that. Instead, it\'s really just links that go to other
parts of your site. So for instance, here I\'ve made an unordered list
with three links. Each of them go to a different part of your page.
There\'s a lot of debate, for better, for worse, as to whether or not
your &lt;nav&gt; tags should be using lists, but the important thing is
to include the &lt;nav&gt; tag to help people navigate through your
page. Oftentimes, you\'ll find the &lt;nav&gt; tag embedded inside the
&lt;header&gt; tag. Another tag is the &lt;footer&gt; tag, and this is a
section that contains information that is pretty typical for the bottom
of the page, such as copyright data, related documents, your links to
social media. And while I say that it\'s usually at the bottom of the
page, this is not required, nor does using the footer tag actually make
it that it\'ll show up at the bottom. So in this example here, I have my
footer tag, my special entity to make the copyright symbol, and then my
name with a line break. And then I\'ve also included a link back to my
main site. Some of our other semantic tags have a little bit more oomph
to them. So for instance, one of the new tags is the &lt;figure&gt; tag,
and it has a lot more semantics than the image tag we\'ve gone over
previously. Every figure can include additional information. So you can
include an image, you can include multimedia, you can include a
combination of all of them. But it also has some additional tags such as
the figcaption. So what this is going to do is somebody who, it provides
additional information for somebody who may not be able to see it. So
the picture normally just floats by itself when its in an image tag,
this lets you say, this text goes specifically with this image. Now
again, we do have the &lt;alt&gt; tag, which helps describe the picture,
but you have to remember, most of us will never see that. There are a
number of other new tags in HTML5, and it\'s not really possible for me
to go over all of them. Instead, you\'ll find that as you develop your
pages and after you\'ve done your initial web design, you\'ll logically
just head towards these different tags. Some of them are structural
elements, such as article, summary, sections, etc. Others you won\'t be
using until we create forms. Another would be input types. Have you ever
noticed that sometimes on your phone, when you click on certain buttons,
different keyboards will pop up, depending on whether you\'re typing in
an email or a URL? These are all things to the new HTML5. Email, date,
color, etc., tags. We\'re also gonna be able to talk about graphics
elements such as canvas, and also media elements which let you go ahead
and put in your movies and music of your choice. The important thing to
remember is that if you\'re developing your page, and you find yourself
using a lot of &lt;div&gt;s, you\'re going astray. You really want to
use the best tag available that will give the most meaning to the users.
Semantic guide tags are gonna help guide your users to the information
in your page. And that\'s really what you want to do, you want to make
your page the most accessible to as many people as possible.

### Code Placement

When you write code, it is important to get into the good habits of
organizing your code. While there are no specific rules about how and
where to place your code, there are definitely conventions. (Conventions
are suggestions that most programmers follow. This way other programmers
can quickly and easily understand their code.)

The most common organization is to have one main folder with your html
files in it. There are also subfolders (folders inside the main folder)
for your image files. 

![Folder with list of documents nested
within.](./images/image017.png)

In this image you can see the following structure:

-   My main folder is named WD4E 

-   The folder has one html file named ***index.html*** and one folder
    called ***images***

Using this structure to display the picture ***bacon.jpg*** the code
will be: 

**\<img src=\"images/bacon.jpg\" alt = \"Brown Labradoodle wearing a
fancy orange bandana\"\>**

It is important that you use the proper case because on some computers
it matters so this would not work since the "I" in "image" is capital
rather than lowercase.

**\<img src=\"Images/bacon.jpg\" alt = \"Brown Labradoodle wearing a
fancy orange bandana\"\>**

It can be very frustrating at first to master folder structure. However,
understanding folder structures will help you, even if you never code
again.

## 2.04. Template Page in Visual Studio Code (8:13)

Earlier, I showed you how you can open the Visual Studio Code editor.
Let\'s go ahead and go back and actually create something real that has
been using the tags that we\'ve been talking about. The minimum
requirements that I\'m going to want you to have is one, create a real
page and make sure to call it \"index.html\". Remember, \"index.html\"
is the default name that all the browsers know to look for when it goes
to open up your site. I want your page to utilize the header, main, and
footer elements. Hey, don\'t cheat. These elements should not be empty.
Take this as a chance to create something interesting. Then finally, as
always, want you to make sure that your page validates. Go in to the W3
validator and/or the WAVE validator to take a look and see what\'s going
on. Make sure to start with the shell. The shell includes your doctype,
any metadata, that\'s the head section, as well as your displayable
content. In the past, it was up to you to remember how to put that all
in. But thanks to Visual Studio Code and Replit, this will all be
built-in to the shell when you open up your editor. I\'m going to give
you some examples, but I really encourage you to take what I\'m about to
do and make it your own. The first step is to create a new file. I\'m
going to call mine \"index.html\". It\'s going to go in my folder and
then we\'ve got it. Step 2 is show off those super programming skills.
Makes you feel like you\'re in some sort of movie where they\'re typing
a little bit and amazing things are happening. I\'m going to type the
exclamation point and Tab. It has now put the shell of my program in for
me. It has put in that I want HTML5. It has put in the head data, which
includes all this cool stuff about what it should look like on a phone
versus a laptop that we\'re not really using yet. Let\'s say I\'m going
to make this document about \"My Favorite Foods.\" In the body, I\'m
going to use the main tag because I know that accessibility checkers are
going to be looking for main. So I\'m going to put that in here. I\'m
going to include an h1 tag because h1 tags really make things pop and
they help our users know what my page is about. It\'s pretty common for
your title and your h1 to be the exact same text. \"My Favorite Foods.\"
Think I\'ll add a paragraph because I don\'t just think about food, I
think a lot about it. I\'m going to say something along the lines of,
\"Growing up in Ohio, my favorite restaurant was actually Rosie\'s
Deli.\" It was awesome. They had curly fries, they had milkshakes, they
had everything. See. Look at me not being a very good typist. \"My
favorite restaurant was Rosie\'s.\" Anyone notice how as I\'m typing,
everything doesn\'t quite fit in the screen? See how I have to scroll
back and forth? If this is happening to you, you can go up to the
\"View\" and you can turn on \"word wrap,\" and then everything is going
to fit nicely for you. My favorite food was Rosie\'s. Accidentally typed
an S in there. And let\'s put what my three favorite foods were. I\'m
going to use an ordered list and I\'m going to put in, it was definitely
the curly fries. Second was absolutely a chocolate milkshake. I\'m
trying to remember. They also had really good chicken nuggets. You can
see, I had very sophisticated taste in food. I have done a lot of typing
so far. One of the things I want to remind everybody is never do this
much typing without remembering to save. I can see that I haven\'t saved
in a while based on that circle. Instead of going up to \"File,\"
\"Save,\" I\'m going to do Command-S. I\'m going to wait a second and
see if people remember. I can see my code. How can I also see my
deployed page? One option is to go in and find \"index.html\" on your
folder and open it up. But instead, I\'m going to click on \"Go Live.\"
When I did, you can see it popped in my page up for me. I\'m going to
make it a little bit bigger so you can see everything. I also wanted to
have a footer, so let\'s add a footer in here. My footer is going to be
\"Copyright Colleen van Lent.\" I\'m going to save my page, and you can
see it popped up. Things are looking good so far. If all we\'re looking
at is my page, everything looks good. But it\'s not a matter of things
looking good to us on the screen. It\'s a matter of validating. Let\'s
go ahead and take this code. I\'m going to open up the W3 validator. The
W3 validator gives us a few different choices. We can validate by the
URL. But we can\'t really do that when we\'re using Sublime because
there\'s no way for this service to be able to peek onto our desktop or
on our computer. We can do validate by file upload, where you choose the
file and upload it, but I\'m just going to do it by direct input. I\'m
going to grab all of my code here. Command A. Command C. I\'m going to
put it in here, and let\'s see what it says. It says hey, wait a second.
Down here near line 19, it says, \"element foote is not allowed as a
child of element body.\" Let\'s go take a look. Instead of calling it a
footer, I called it a foote. Let\'s go ahead and fix that up. And so now
that looks better. Let\'s go back and save it. I can just do live server
again, and it looks better. So, let\'s do another check. Let\'s take
this site and we would like to go to the WAVE accessibility checker and
check this site as well. But again, we have a problem that it wants to
know what the URL of our code is and we don\'t have a URL because we\'re
using Visual Studio Code. So you do have a few options. One is that you
can click on \"Browser Extensions.\" I\'m going to add this to my page.
I\'m going to take a quick look and see if this will go for me. I\'m
going to go back to my page, I\'m going to refresh just in case, I\'m
going to right-click, and you can see it says \"WAVE this page.\" You
can see it went through and it said, excellent. Boom. It went through
and it doesn\'t find any other errors or any contrast errors. It\'s
pretty unusual. I encourage you to go in, add a few more things, add
some typos, and see what happens. You might be surprised to see that
you\'re really starting to pick this up, and you might also be surprised
to see that it\'s really important to go slowly, save often, check
often, and make sure that you\'re writing code that you can be proud of
that\'s accessible.

## 2.05. Template Page in Replit (8:04)

Earlier, we made a very simple web page using Replit, but now let\'s
make something that\'s a little bit more involved using the tags that
you\'ve been learning about. What I want you to do is create a page
called \"index.html.\" Your page should utilize a header, the main, and
footer elements, and hey, don\'t cheat, these elements should not be
empty. You should be using this as an opportunity really to be playing
with the things you\'ve learned. And of course, as you\'re coding, make
sure that your page validates. A lot of times we wait until the end and
it can be overwhelming to pick up on the mistakes that we\'ve made. I\'m
going to encourage you to save as you\'re developing and keep validating
the page. With every website, we start with a shell. That shell is going
to include the doctype stating that it\'s an HTML5 document. The
meta-data that\'s for us right now going to be the title of our page,
but as you become a more confident programmer, it might include links to
CSS files, to JavaScript, or perhaps to Favicons. Finally, today you\'re
really going to focus on the displayable content, adding in paragraphs
or lists, eventually we\'ll be adding images. So, let\'s go ahead and
have some fun by opening up Replit and creating a page, testing it,
sharing it, and validating it. I\'m going to begin by creating a Repl, I
want it to be an HTML file, and I had mentioned that we like to call our
files \"index.html.\" It\'s going to be a little bit harder to do that
with Replit since we put so many files in the same place, but let\'s go
ahead and go with it right here. So, I\'ve got it\'s an HTML, CSS,
JavaScript file, I\'ve named it \"index.html\" and now I\'m going to
click on \"Create.\" Right away, Replit is going to fill in that data
that we had talked about, it has our data type. It has our extra
meta-data where it tells us how big the screen is going to be and links
to style sheets. It\'s included a title, the title\'s \"Replit,\" and it
included some like, very basic code that has the body. I\'m going to go
ahead though and delete all of the links to the JavaScript and start off
with this really bare bones page and I\'m going to save it, okay? The
first thing that I want to do is I want to take the code that Replit
gave us and see, does it validate? So, you have three choices, you can
validate by a URL, you can validate using a file upload, which we don\'t
really have the file on our computer when we use Replit. So we can\'t
use that one, and we can do validate by direct input. I\'m going to go
ahead and start with the validate by direct input. You copy all the
code, I\'m going to do a quick command-C, I\'m going to put it in here
and let\'s check it, all right? You know, it\'s saying you\'re doing
okay, there\'s a couple warnings saying maybe it would be a good idea to
say that the language is going to be English. And it\'s also mentioning
that they\'re using a little bit of an old construct by adding a
backslash s, but there\'s no errors, so we\'re doing okay. I also want
to check it on the Wave Accessibility Evaluator. I can do that by going
back to the code, and I\'m going to click right here, and I\'m going to
open up this site in a new window. There\'s two ways to do this, one is
to click on the little icon that says \"open in a new tab.\" I don\'t
always have the best of luck with that, but let\'s go ahead and try it
and see if it works right here. Oh excellent, it actually worked. Your
other option, just so you know if it doesn\'t work for you, is to copy
and paste this link right here, all right? So, I know what my URL is,
I\'m going to put it into the Wave Accessibility Tool, and I\'m going to
put it in here. Let\'s give it a second, and right away you can see that
it said, \"hey, right here they\'re saying it\'s definitely a problem.\"
We want to add in what the language is, all right, so let\'s go ahead
and go back, and I\'m going to put \"language=es.\" All right, so I put
that in. I\'m going to go up here again, I\'m going to refresh the page,
give it a second, and you can see that the error is gone, all right?
This was a lot of work just to get us started, we haven\'t even made
anything ourselves yet. So, now let\'s go ahead and start adding that
extra information. Maybe I want to talk to them about, let\'s think of a
good thing that we can talk about. We\'ll do my favorite movies from the
80s, all right, since I\'m changing the topic, I\'m also going to change
the title, \"My Favorite,\" I should learn to type that word, \"80s
Movies.\" It\'s not uncommon for the title and the h1 to be exactly the
same, or at least very similar, all right? Let\'s go ahead and say to be
honest, for me, \"The 80s were great,\" right? I had a paper route, I
could ride my bike, I went to a lot of movies, \"So were the movies.\"
If I\'m going to list off my favorite movies, it makes sense that I
should use some sort of list. I could use an ordered list, an fixed with
&lt;ol&gt; if I wanted to rank them. But since they\'re all so great,
I\'m going to go ahead and do an unordered list and include three
things. Number one, we can\'t forget the good old \"Goonies,\" all
right? Style number two, I will do \"Back to the Future,\" and we\'ll
just do those two for right now. So, I\'m going to go ahead and do a
save, which I should have done a while ago, and you can see that it has
automatically updated my page. I\'m going to go ahead and add a footer,
Oops, because we said it\'s good to add a footer to your page, and I\'ll
put in \"Copyright Colleen.\" When I save that, you can see it added a
little \"Copyright Colleen\" right here off to the side, everything
looks great. It doesn\'t matter that everything looks great, we always
want to go in as we\'re coding, I\'m going to do a copy and a paste,
I\'m going to go back here to the validator. Let\'s go ahead and check.
And what\'s going to pop up is you will notice that it gave me an error
that says \"the element foot is not allowed a child of element body\"
somewhere near line 18. Look at that, instead of calling it a footer, I
had only called it a foot, so I need to go in here and fix that up. Once
I do, my page is going to validate, and you can keep creating. So, this
is where I\'m going to leave you to create your own page about things
that are interesting to you. Don\'t forget to add that head section, the
main section, and the footer, because as we learn about more
accessibility tools, you\'re going to realize that they are an important
step to making your page accessible for everyone.

# Starter Code for Template Page

I just want to give you some sample template code. If need be, you can
copy and paste this to get you started:

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

\</body\>

\</html\>

    \<title\>Document\</title\>

\</head\>

\<body\>

\<head\>

    \<meta charset=\"UTF-8\"\>

\<!DOCTYPE html\>

\<html lang=\"en\"\>

# Images and Icons

It is difficult to believe that the internet used to be all text. 
Knowing how to incorporate visual media (images, icons, videos, etc) is
an important part of the process of building a webpage.    Before you
continue with the next lessons I encourage you to review the old reading
on images and the new reading below about icons.

-   [HTML Images](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html_images.asp)

-   [Icons Tutorial](https://www.w3schools.com/icons/)

Not only do we want to talk about how to add images and icons to our
page, we will want to talk about making sure that they are accessible.
We can do this by using alt text, transcripts, and aria-labels. 

I will be focusing on alt text so make sure to watch for these important
guidelines while you watch the upcoming videos: 

-   The text should describe the image if the image contains information

-   The text should explain where the link goes if the image is inside
    an \<a\> element

-   Use alt=\"\" if the image is only for decoration

## Making All of Your Images Accessible Everywhere

Understanding how images work on other platforms is important too. For
instance, when you make a presentation at work you can add alternative
text to the images and charts in your slides. When you post to social
media you can add descriptive text.

Here are some resources for you to use:

-   [How do I edit the alternative text for a photo on
    Facebook?](https://www.facebook.com/help/android-app/214124458607871)

-   [Edit the alternative text for a post on Instagram \| Instagram Help
    Center](https://help.instagram.com/503708446705527)

-   [Add alternative text to your Pins \| Pinterest
    help](https://help.pinterest.com/en/article/add-alternative-text-to-your-pins)

Since platforms change all of the time you may find that the links above
have changed.  Or maybe there is a different platform you are interested
in. You can also use the search phrase below with your platform at the
end.

-   "How do I add descriptive text to images on ...."

Note, if your app doesn't support alternative text, consider using one
that does and then using the app to link to it.

## 2.06. Images (9:28)

It may be hard to believe, but when you think about the early days of
the Internet, there were actually no images at all. Now, it\'s hard to
find a page that doesn\'t actually have more images than text. So, as
you add images to your page, we want to make sure that you do it the
right way. Not just by writing good, accessible, clean code, but also
making sure your images look the way that you want them to look. The
image tag really has a lot of things going on with it. Many file types
are supported when you\'re making your web page. Your files can be what
we call jpeg, which might be a .jpg. It might be a .jpeg and that
matters. It might be a GIF or it might be a PNG. There are some fancier
options with things called SVG and BMP images. And the important thing
to know is that when you\'re making your files and when you\'re adding
them to your page, these file extensions must be included. Your computer
doesn\'t know what that type of file is unless you tell it. The other
important thing to know is that if someone is visiting your page and
looking at your images, your page is being downloaded onto their
computer. But their computer also needs to take the time to download
each and every single one of your images. So, if you are creating a site
that has a lot of pictures, it might be really hard for someone with a
slow internet to actually be able to access all of them. Size can
definitely be a factor. Every image requires its own HTTP Request, so if
those images are broken, if they don\'t belong to you, if they\'re
behind a paywall, it can all mess up your page. The first thing you need
to realize is that when you link an image, your browser displays the
image as big or as small as the file. And that size is rarely optimal. I
don\'t know if it\'s ever happened to you where someone for me, it\'s
usually my mom will email me a picture and I\'m like trying to see it
all and it\'s like scroll, scroll, scroll, and it never really fits. Or
if someone texts it to me, it\'s so tiny I can barely see it. So, the
quick solution for that is you can either change the file or we can use
something called width and height attributes. If you decide to use an
editor to permanently change the style of the image, that\'s only going
to really work on what we call like local files, the files that you have
stored on your computer. If you are trying to use an image from somebody
else\'s site, you can\'t really change the size of their picture, right?
You don\'t own it, but any of your local images. You can use something
like preview or Paint to open it up and adjust the size to how you would
like it to fit not only the size, but you can also crop it to different
dimensions. However, more and more people are using these, what we call
attributes to size the image. It used to be the case that you never
wanted to use your HTML code to set the size of your picture. But we\'re
realizing that using width can actually improve the accessibility of
your page. So when you start using the &lt;img&gt; tag, I want you to
include at least the width attribute. You don\'t need both, but at least
the width attribute. And what that will do is it means when your page is
loaded, it\'ll keep the pictures from like kind of flashing and
flickering as they adjust to different sizes. Let\'s look at what I\'m
talking about. What I have here is a &lt;figure&gt; tag and inside my
figure I have an image and a figure caption. You can see that I\'ve used
src=\"imgs/Ashtabula.jpg\" That means I have a folder. And somewhere in
that folder there\'s something called Ashtabula. There\'s a picture
called \"Ashtabula.jpg.\" If that picture can\'t load, then I have what
we call the alternative text that describes it just as \"My house.\" To
be honest, that\'s not great alternative text. Way better. Alternative
text would be a visual description of my house, but that doesn\'t really
fit on a slide very well. So, you\'ll have to forgive me on this one.
You can also, if you\'d like, set the width of that picture. If the
picture of my house was way too big, we can say, you know what, when we
load this picture, let\'s make sure it\'s always 500 pixels wide. By
only setting the width, it will automatically set the height so that it
height so it doesn\'t like skew the picture. It\'ll still look really
good, right? So, that is one way to do it is to set the width by hard
coding it to how many pixels you want it to be. This may have been a
fine idea to use back in the early 2000s, but nowadays we realize that
people might be looking at your website, on a phone, on a tablet, on a
really large screen. So, what looks good on one size may not look good
on another. 500 pixels may be way too big for my phone and way too small
for my giant screen. So, one of the things we could do is if we wanted
to, we could try setting the height to match our screen size. But
that\'s often going to skew our image size, right? It\'s just not going
to look good. A better idea is to use percentages. In this example,
I\'ve done same exact image, same exact alt text. But the difference is
its width equals 50%. What does that 50% mean? 50% of what? Well,
typically the browser is going to open up the page and it\'s going to
look and see how much space is this figure tag taking up and maybe the
figure is taking up the whole width of your browser. It\'s going to set
your picture to 50% of the browser. So, as you make your screen bigger,
the picture will get bigger. As you make the screen smaller, the picture
will get smaller. It\'s a really nice way to kind of we call it like
fluid measurements and to be reactive and responsive to people. In
addition to regular images that use the image tag, people really like to
use things called favicons. Favicons are those little tiny images that
show up inside the tab of your browser. So if you look, you\'ll see that
Coursera has its own favicon. If you are looking at a Google Doc,
you\'ll see it has its own favicon. You can make your own favicon if you
want. The difference between favicons and image tags is that the favicon
always goes in the head section. So, instead of using the image tag,
what I have here is link, what type of relationship I have. This is
going to be an icon. It\'s going to be a PNG file, and that PNG file is
located in my images folder. I can\'t stress enough that when you use
images, it\'s very, very, very important to use alternative text. What
alternative text will do is it provides basically words for non-text
content. If someone\'s using a screen reader, every time it gets to an
image, the screen reader will read off the description that you
included. If an image isn\'t loading, either because you wrote the wrong
image name or because someone\'s internet is slow and they can\'t
download it, it\'ll actually be displayed in place of the images. This
is great for both accessibility and for debugging and figuring out which
of your pictures aren\'t working. Also, by including alternative text,
you\'re providing semantic meaning for search engines. So, if you have a
business and you would like to promote that business, alternative text
has these kind of sneaky side benefits as well as just being, you know,
a decent human being. As you start to do images, they\'re going to be
great, but you\'re going to have some problems and it\'s going to take
some time to get them to work. So, if things aren\'t working right, make
sure you\'re using the right file extensions. If it\'s .jpg, jpg, make
sure you\'re not writing .jpeg, or vice versa. Don\'t name all your
files \"image_26859,\" blah blah blah, right? Rename them. Give them a
good name. Because often the file names are a problem. Or when I use
that fancy term file path, that usually means you\'ve hopefully been
putting all of your images into an image folder, but you forgot to
include that folder name when you were linking it. And for right now, as
you start to use images, make sure you are setting that height and or
width in the HTML code itself using the attribute. If you decide to
learn more with us, you can later learn about how to use CSS to do even
more with your images to make them pop. Good luck.

### Copyright, Fair Use, and Inclusive Images

### Where to get images?

Every time a product is created, that product is automatically protected
by copyright. Copyright protection prevents others from using the work
in certain ways, such as copying it and putting it online. When you add
images to your site you want to make sure that you are doing so legally.
There are a variety of websites that host content that is free to use or
share without copyright restrictions. Much of this use is facilitated by
Creative Commons licenses. 

The University of Michigan has a resource called [Finding Usable
Materials](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vaHMKaxvcrPpcptbSxWQMz1qD0Uv-CqVZOTMX9ilWNQ/edit?usp=sharing)
that was developed in partnership with the University of Michigan
Library Copyright Office. It has links to various sites where you can
find photographs, images, icons, and more that you can consider reusing
in your own work.

A second resource from the University of Michigan is called [DEIJ Open
Image
Bank](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VXcfZu3rHAcPThdSAN7w_vHDVoLGbHV9hih5yEsB6Fw/edit?usp=sharing).
It includes links to high-quality image banks that reflect diversity,
equity, and inclusion.

## 2.07. Accessible Images (7:43)

I know we\'ve talked about images in the past, but I\'d really like to
take a moment for us to stop and talk about them a little bit more. They
often say that a picture is worth a thousand words, but we need to think
about, is there a way to also have a picture, say, maybe 10 or 11 words,
a way to describe what you were hoping to represent by including that
image on your page? And that\'s what brings us to the alternative text
attribute. Alternative text is going to provide a texture alternative to
what we call non-text content, right? So if you have a picture, any
image on your screen, what\'s going to happen when a screen reader gets
to that? If you don\'t include alternative text, what\'s going to happen
is that the screen reader is going to read off the title of your image,
and that\'s rarely a very good thing to do. It also is used when you\'re
debugging to display in place of images. So if you forget to link your
image correctly or you forgot to download an image, it\'s really handy
when instead of just seeing a little broken icon, it actually shows you
what image you meant to have there. It also provides semantic meaning
for search engines, which improves basically the amount of traffic that
you might get to your page. These are all things, though, that I\'ve
mentioned before, so I really want to talk to you a little bit more in
depth into how to create alternative text attributes. A key to creating
good alt text is to just be very accurate and very succinct, all right?
You don\'t want to be redundant. Your alt text shouldn\'t say \"picture
of,\" \"graphic of,\" right? So, for instance, if I have a picture of my
three children and they are pushing themselves, pushing each other into
a pool, I don\'t need to say, \"picture of three children pushing each
other into a pool.\" I want to think about, all right, why did I add
this image? Should it really be like the alt text of, \"my children
having fun?\" Should it be, \"my children being idiots,\" right? Why did
I put the picture there? That\'s what you want to think about when
you\'re creating good alt text. Sometimes a picture is just there
because you kind of just had some space to fill. So it\'s actually okay
to leave alt text as blank, but that doesn\'t mean you don\'t have the
alt attribute, it means you\'re actually going to use alt=\"\". Because
that\'s you and I saying to somebody, hey, we know that alternative text
is important, and we want you to know that this picture just doesn\'t
have any important extra meaning. For some images, especially
infographics, right? Like and the charts and the things that have a ton
of information, you might think, how in the world can I create succinct
alt text for that? There\'s too much information. So if that\'s the
case, there is a special thing that you can use called a long alt text.
But my recommendation would be instead to create an entirely second page
where you really talk about the details of the infographic and just link
to it. So when someone gets to the page, if it has a lot of complicated
information, they can take that time to digest it. So, great, you\'ve
decided that you\'re going to include images on your page, you\'re going
to include the alt text, where can you find the images for your site?
You can always use your own personal images, right? You own those, those
are great. You can also use images from image sharing sites, and we\'ll
include some links for places that you can find that you can use images
that have what we call Creative Commons usage. What this means is when
you go in and you search for the images, there\'s actually a little
option you can turn on that says \"usage rights\" and Creative Commons
usage means someone has said, hey, I am 100% okay with you using my
pictures so long as you\'re not using them to make money. Another option
which is becoming extremely popular is to use icons. Icons are those
almost little cartoonish looking infographics that you can use on your
page. Speaking of icons, a lot of times people will talk about emojis
and icons interchangeably and basically how popular they are. The nice
thing about if you include an emoji on your site is that it will be read
by a screen reader, right? The screen reader knows when you have a
smiley face, when you have a flag waving, etc, things like that. A
screen reader does not know what to do when it comes across an icon. And
since icons aren\'t images, they can\'t use the alt attribute instead.
If you decide to use icons, there\'s a brand new attribute that I want
to introduce, and it\'s called \"aria-label.\" And the aria-label will
read off what that icon is about. So in this case, if I have the little
icon of Pinterest, I would add aria-label, Pinterest. If I had really
basically any icon at all, think about what would you like someone to
say out loud to you if you wanted to describe what that icon is
representing? When you use images, I\'d like you to also think about
where those images are coming from, who you\'re representing, and what
you\'re trying to make out of your page. Don\'t constrain yourself to
the most common images, right? If you do an image search, it\'s really
easy to put something like favorite foods, and if you\'re me, pizza will
show up, or maybe popcorn. But instead, maybe you could include
\"favorite foods from\" and fill in someplace that you\'ve traveled
recently and you\'d like to show off maybe something from different
cultures. If you\'re doing athletes, you can include athletes in
adaptive sports whenever you\'re having pictures of people try to get
people of different body types, right? It only takes a few seconds to
make your pictures more impactful, so there\'s really no reason not to
do it anymore. Plus, using diverse images has the ability to draw more
people to your site because everyone likes to see somebody who looks
like them or someone that they kind of aspire to be. So I would like to
encourage you to use images in the most impactful way possible. And so
I\'m putting into some of the resources, places that I have discovered
you can look to try to improve kind of your own outlook. So I just want
to kind of finish with some tips. One is, there\'s a great website
called alt Decision Tree, a decision tree is basically when it asks you
a question and it\'s yes or no, yes or no. So there\'s a great alt
decision tree to help you figure out what type of alternative text you
should add to your images. If you\'re using something else that\'s
visual, but not an image, such as an icon, make sure to use aria-labels.
I know I said that a screen reader would read emojis, but still, let\'s
avoid excessive emojis, it can be hard to follow for people who really
rely on text, right? Reading text. And then finally, try to diversify
your images. It\'s kind of fun to go out and when you show off your
page, people to go, \"I\'ve never seen that before,\" or, \"hey, that\'s
something really exciting food that I would like to try.\" So do what
you can to try to just make sure that the page reflects yourself and the
best self that you can be.

# Alternative Text {#alternative-text .unnumbered}

Creating good alternative text is almost an art. The good news is that
it is an art that even artistically-challenged people like myself can do
well. The key is to think about the meanings behind your images, not a
description of them. So here are some tips:

## Tips {#tips .unnumbered}

-   **Decide what information the image conveys:** Does someone need to
    see the page to understand your message? If not, you can treat the
    image as decorative use a null (empty) text alternative (alt=\"\").
    Make sure not to include a space inside the quotes since some screen
    readers may then read it aloud.

-   **If the image is information, be complete, but concise**: In most
    cases you should be able to use a short phrase or sentence as alt
    text.

-   **Prioritize information in text alternative:** Aim to put the most
    important information at the beginning.

-   **Avoid superfluous information:** There is rarely a need to use the
    words "image", "icon", or "picture" in the alt text.

-   **Handle complex images as a special case:** Complex images such as
    graphs, charts, maps, and illustrations contain substantial
    information -- more than can be conveyed in a short phrase or
    sentence. In these cases, a two-part text alternative is required.
    The first part is the short description to identify the image and,
    where appropriate, indicate the location of the long description.
    The second part is the long description -- a textual representation
    of the essential information conveyed by the image.

If you want to learn more about creating good alt text, I recommend the
[W3 alt decision
tree](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/images/decision-tree/) site as a
resource. This site guides you with simple \"yes/no\" questions on how
to create your alt text.

## 2.08. Hyperlinks (9:23) {#hyperlinks-923 .unnumbered}

Hi, today we\'re going to be talking about hyperlinks, or links, as
they\'re more commonly called. And how you can use them to link your
document with others out there. Now, links are really what make the web
a web. It\'s this whole idea that different links built together create
this kind of knowledge that search engines or you yourself can gain by
going from page to page to page, and with hopefully related material.
So, let\'s get right into how you create a link on your page. Links are
called anchor links and that\'s where we get the a for in the &lt;a&gt;
tag. When you use an anchor tag, the &lt;a&gt; tag you\'re going to need
to make sure that you\'ve two different parts. You need a hyper
reference and you need content. So the hyper reference is just the
reference to the location of the new content. So in this case I used
http://www.umich.edu. That tells a browser, if somebody clicks on this
link this is where I want to request the new page from. We also need to
have content. The content is what we call the clickable part. In this
case, it\'s text. I would actually click on an underlined text that
says, University of Michigan. But in some cases, it might be an image
instead. So what types of links can we have? Some of the most common are
called absolute links. We also have relative links. Internal links and
graphical links and I\'m gonna show you examples of each one of those.
With an absolute reference in the href section we need to put a fully
formed URL. You need to have the http or https, the address, and any
type of extra document name you want. So if you remember there\'s three
parts to URL, you have the protocol, the host, and the document. You
need to include all of those if you have an absolute reference, right?
Everything else is still pretty much the same. For a relative reference,
we slightly change what goes in to the href. Instead of linking to some
outside or even internal webpage, we\'re only going to put, in this
case, the file name.

So in this case we\'re going to link to \"page2.html.\" You might get
slightly more in-depth than that, where you can include also some sort
of folder name. So in this case we\'d be going to the file called
\"page2.html\" but it\'s in a different folder called \"docs.\" The
third way we can use a relative reference is to what we call use the ID
tag. So when you have href equals hash pound or history, we\'re saying
there\'s another location inside the same file and it\'s called
\"history.\" So, absolute versus relative links. When would you use
absolute links versus when would you use relative links? With absolute
links, you\'re basically saying, I am not in charge of this page,
somebody else is. So if you\'re linking to somebody else\'s page,
absolutely use the absolute link with the full reference in there. For
relative is when you\'re developing your own site. And it\'s really
helpful to use relative links instead of absolute, so that way if you
move your page to a different server, or you move it into a different
folder, you don\'t need to rename everything. And so those are some of
the benefits to using local links, is just the idea that you don\'t need
to update as much. Now, one of the things that you need to make sure
that you never do is have a link that includes some sort of file
structure, we\'ll call it. So check your links. Make sure that it never
says, \"C:page\" or \"MyDocumentsPage\" or anything that is very
specific to your computer. The reason that you don\'t wanna do that is,
If you put your page out on the web. If you\'re done you\'ve put it up
on a server or a hosting and you want other people to click. Well, it
doesn\'t make sense that they would be able to access pages that are on
your computer. So never ever have a reference that includes something
local to your machine. All right? One of the other things that you can
do is you can use images as the link. So the clickable component
doesn\'t have to be text. You\'ve seen this a lot. It can be icons,
images. different things along that line. In this case, I went in and I
use the regular h reference and what we\'re changing now, is not the h
reference, but content that goes between the opening and closing tag.
and I have gone ahead and I\'ve put in an image instead. Make sure that
you use the alt text to go along with that image. In another case I\'ve
done something very similar, the only difference is, instead of using a
local reference right here for the image, I\'ve used an absolute
reference. I\'ve put in the entire URL. So let\'s talk usability issues
and accessibility issues. If you\'re going to use a clickable component,
you wanna make sure that it has an informative name. There\'s software
out there that can list all of the links within a page for people who
are looking for things, who can\'t use typical. typical means of
accessing the page. It is not at all helpful to them if all the links
are labelled, \"click here,\" \"click here,\" \"click here,\" right? You
want to give it some sort of informative name. You also want to make
sure that if you are using an image for the clickable portion of your
link. That image needs to have some sort of alt text or other
information available to those who can\'t see the image. So, let me show
you some coded example of those types of links. All right? As you can
see here, I have a reference to absolute references, relative
references, images as links, and then some embedded links, as well. So,
if I were to click on \"Washtenaw Dairy\" or \"Rosie\'s Coffee Bar and
Bakery,\" or \"Dexter\'s Bakery\" etc., it would actually take me to
their pages. Head back. One of the tricks I want to point out as I\'m
doing this is, as I hover over each one of these links, if you look at
the very, very bottom of my browser, and I can\'t really show at the
same time, but as you highlight it, it shows you which URL you are going
to. And I think this is very valuable for people to know, because if
you\'re ever hovering over a link, and the information you see at the
bottom of the page doesn\'t match what you expect, I wouldn\'t click on
it. So absolute references take you away from your site. Relative
references can take you to something that\'s within your folder. So
right here I have an image of some doughnuts, and I have gone on and
they\'re in my folder in my file. So I was able to link to them just
using the picture name. All right? We can also use images as links as
well. Instead of writing \"Doughnuts from the Squire Shop,\" I went
ahead and made it so you can click on the image to get to the larger
view. This last idea of embedded links is a little bit interesting. So
let me bring you over to the code for just a second and show you. Right
down here, I have something called \"Relative References\" with an
id=\"relative\". I have embedded links with an id that says \"embedded\"
and up here, at the very beginning you can see I have &lt;div id
=\"absolute\"&gt;. With embedded links, I can click on any of these and
navigate within the same page. So I\'m not gonna go to a different page.
I\'m not gonna open up a new tab. Instead I\'m gonna jump to different
places within the page. So I went to Absolute. I went to Relative now if
I try to do Embedded references it doesn\'t look like it moved but it
really did. It\'s just that we\'re already there. All right, so that is
how these kind of embedded or internal links work, right? Now if at any
time you get confused about how code is working. I just want to remind
you that you can always go to \"view.\" \"Developer\" and \"view
source\" to really get a better idea of how people are creating their
pages and their links. Next, let\'s talk about targets, all right?
Anchors can take a different target attribute as well. We\'ve got the
source, let\'s add anchor. So, or, target. So you might have target
equals self. This is kind of the default action. This is going to happen
if you don\'t put anything at all. If you don\'t even include target,
and what it means is when you click on a link, open up in the same tab
or window that you\'re looking at right now.

If you put target equals blank. You\'re going to leave the current page
that you\'re in exactly the same, and open up a new tab or window for
where you want the new page to be opened. Now this has its upside and
downside. The upside is that your site is still open in someone\'s
window. The downside is that many people don\'t like it when it keeps
adding on and adding on, and as they progress through your page, you\'re
making them open more and more tabs. There are two other options that
we\'re not going to really talk about here, but you can see them in the
reading, and those are top and parent, and that deals with if you\'re
really getting into the idea of having multiple windows, frames, etc.
open. So, let\'s go ahead and review, because making sure that you
understand links is vitally important to your success in this course or
even in just understanding HTML. So, the first thing you need to know is
a page without links is extremely rare. And to be honest, it\'s almost
not even a web page. It\'s just a document. Links can be absolute,
relative and internal. And internal, again, was the kind where it had
the hash mark in it. I think I may have referred to them as relative,
but I wanna make sure I\'m clear that the hash mark makes it internal.
You want to use caution when using images in links. It\'s not that
they\'re not a great thing to do, and I\'m not saying you should do it.
I\'m just saying make sure that you do it carefully to ensure that
everyone who is viewing your page can get the same content and the same
experience as everyone else.

## 2.09. (x:xx) {#xxx .unnumbered}

## 2.10. (x:xx) {#xxx-1 .unnumbered}

## 2.11. (x:xx) {#xxx-2 .unnumbered}

## 2.12. (x:xx) {#xxx-3 .unnumbered}

## 2.13. (x:xx) {#xxx-4 .unnumbered}

the end...11/26/2023 last updated &/or reviewed.
